Espen Green jobber som konsulent og teknisk salgsstøtte på Computer Associates sine Information Management produkter. Han ble med på lasset da CA kjøpte PLATINUM technology i 1999, der han hadde jobbet siden 1996. Espen var ferdig utdannet ingeniør i 1991, og har siden den gang jobbet med data.

Foredragsholder innen: Rule Engines Einar Landre, born in 1960 has more than 15 years of experience in development of distributed systems. He is educated from University of Oslo and the University of Strathclyde in Scotland. His career can be divided into three major parts, first 7 seven years as developer at Norsk Data, working primarily with communication protocols and high performance computing systems for image processing. Then 7 years as consultant and later team manager for the network group at Skrivervik Data. The last three years he has been working for Bouvet, where he currently acts as lead architect in a international Java based development project within retail.

Foredragsholder innen: Sertifisering Hjemmeside: http://www.accenture.no Håvard Bjåstad har vært ansatt i Accenture siden 1994. Han har primært arbeidet som teknisk arkitekt innenfor bank og finans med hovedfokus på integrasjonsprosjekter med Java og J2EE. Han har arbeidet ved Accentures teknologisenter i Palo Alto og leder Accentures Java Center of Excellence.

Foredragsholder innen: Sertifisering Khalid A. Mughal is an associate professor at the Department of Informatics, University of Bergen, Norway.  During his extensive career, he has designed and implemented many courses on Java, object-oriented system development, and compiler techniques.  He has also given seminars for the IT industry. He is the principal author of the introductory textbook Java Som Første Programmeringsspråk (Java as a First Programming Language) published by Cappelen Akademisk Forlag, 2002. He also is the principal author of A Programmer's Guide to Java" Certification - A Comprehensive Primer (Second Edition) - published by Addison-Wesley, 2003.

Hjemmeside: http://www.dreambean.com Rickard Öberg er en internasjonalt anerkjent Java-ekspert som har spesialisert seg på avanserte mellomvarearkitekturer og en av de ledende autoriteter på EJB og J2EE. Han har skrevet boken "Mastering RMI", en avansert bok på utvikling av RMI-løsninger i Java og EJB. Rickard er en av de som har vært med å utvikle EJB spesifikasjonen fra SUN til det den er i dag. Han er også en av utviklerne på "core teamet" bak jBoss Application Server, applikasjonsserverenes svar på Linux. I tillegg jobber han på diverse OpenSource prosjekter, og har vunnet ikke mindre enn åtte konkuranser på Java applikasjons utvikling og J2EE servere. Rickard har vært foredragsholder på mange av de store Java konferansene og drar alltid mengder av tilhørere gjennom sin måte å fremføre stoffet på og hans ytterst tunge fagkunnskap. Rickard har også tidligere gjestet JavaBin flere ganger tidligere med foredrag om JMX, Porlets og AOP. Med sitt siste foredrag i AOP klarte han å vekke til live en het debatt som pågikk i flere uker etterpå. Han vil i år besøke JavaZone for å snakke om AOP for avanserte.

Hjemmeside: http://heim.ifi.uio.no/~trygver Trygve Reenskaug is professor emeritus of informatics at the University of Oslo and senior technical advisor to Mogul Norway. He has 40 years experience in software engineering research and the development of industrial strength software products. He has extensive teaching and speaking experience including keynotes, talks and tutorials. His firsts include the Autokon system for computer aided design of ships with end user programming language, structured programming, and a data base oriented architecture from 1960; object oriented applications and collaboration (role) modeling in 1973; Model-View-Controller, the world's first reusable object oriented framework, in 1979; OOram role modeling method and tool in 1983; and the premier book on role modeling in 1995. He was a member of the UML Core Team, was a major contributor to UML 1.4, and is currently involved with the collaboration part of the emerging UML 2.0. He is also interested in creating methods and tools for the development of distributed information systems.

Hjemmeside: http://www.two-sdg.demon.co.uk/curbralan/kevlin.html Kevlin Henney is an independent consultant and trainer based in the UK. The focus of his work is in programming languages, OO, CBD, UML, patterns and software architecture. He is a columnist for C/C++ Users Journal (online), Application Development Advisor (UK) and JavaSpektrum (Germany), and previously wrote columns in Java Report and C++ Report. He is also a popular speaker at conferences in the US and Europe.

Foredragsholder innen: Software development Hjemmeside: http://www.threeriversinstitute.org/ Kent Beck Kent Beck is the founder and director of TRI. He has pioneered patterns for software development, the xUnit family of testing frameworks, the HotDraw drawing editor framework, CRC cards, refactoring, and most recently Extreme Programming. He is the author of Extreme Programming Explained, Planning Extreme Programming, and The Smalltalk Best Practice Patterns. He lives on 20 acres in rural southern Oregon with his wife, five children (one sadly now gone to college), four dogs, two sheep, and a variable number of domestic fowl.

Joshua Bloch is a Senior Staff Engineer at Sun Microsystems, where he is an architect in the Core Java Platform Group. He wrote the Jolt-award winning book "Effective Java" (Addison-Wesley, 2001). He led the design and implementation of the award-winning Java Collections Framework, java.math, java.util.prefs, and assertions, and contributed to other parts of the Java platform. He currently leads one JCP expert group, JSR-175 (metadata), and co-leads another, JSR-201 (assorted language enhancements). Previously, he was a Senior Systems Designer at Transarc Corporation, where he designed and implemented many parts of the Encina distributed transaction processing system. He holds a Ph.D. from Carnegie-Mellon University and a B.S. from Columbia.
Neal Gafter is a Senior Staff Software Engineer at Sun Microsystems, where he is currently developing and supporting the Java compiler and language tools (javac, javadoc, javah, and javap). He has been working in compilers since 1981. He completed his Ph.D. from the University of Rochester in 1990. His main interests are compiler technology to support integrated programming environments, programming language design, and automated instruction selection.

Joshua Bloch is a Senior Staff Engineer at Sun Microsystems, where he is an architect in the Core Java Platform Group. He wrote the Jolt-award winning book "Effective Java" (Addison-Wesley, 2001). He led the design and implementation of the award-winning Java Collections Framework, java.math, java.util.prefs, and assertions, and contributed to other parts of the Java platform. He currently leads one JCP expert group, JSR-175 (metadata), and co-leads another, JSR-201 (assorted language enhancements). Previously, he was a Senior Systems Designer at Transarc Corporation, where he designed and implemented many parts of the Encina distributed transaction processing system. He holds a Ph.D. from Carnegie-Mellon University and a B.S. from Columbia.
Neal Gafter is a Senior Staff Software Engineer at Sun Microsystems, where he is currently developing and supporting the Java compiler and language tools (javac, javadoc, javah, and javap). He has been working in compilers since 1981. He completed his Ph.D. from the University of Rochester in 1990. His main interests are compiler technology to support integrated programming environments, programming language design, and automated instruction selection.

Hjemmeside: http://www.dreambean.com Rickard Öberg er en internasjonalt anerkjent Java-ekspert som har spesialisert seg på avanserte mellomvarearkitekturer og en av de ledende autoriteter på EJB og J2EE. Han har skrevet boken "Mastering RMI", en avansert bok på utvikling av RMI-løsninger i Java og EJB. Rickard er en av de som har vært med å utvikle EJB spesifikasjonen fra SUN til det den er i dag. Han er også en av utviklerne på "core teamet" bak jBoss Application Server, applikasjonsserverenes svar på Linux. I tillegg jobber han på diverse OpenSource prosjekter, og har vunnet ikke mindre enn åtte konkuranser på Java applikasjons utvikling og J2EE servere. Rickard har vært foredragsholder på mange av de store Java konferansene og drar alltid mengder av tilhørere gjennom sin måte å fremføre stoffet på og hans ytterst tunge fagkunnskap. Rickard har også tidligere gjestet JavaBin flere ganger tidligere med foredrag om JMX, Porlets og AOP. Med sitt siste foredrag i AOP klarte han å vekke til live en het debatt som pågikk i flere uker etterpå. Han vil i år besøke JavaZone for å snakke om AOP for avanserte.


Foredragsholder innen: Building Quality into Development Jon Harrison is the European Product Line Manager for the JBuilder line of products at Borland. In his current role, Jon is a key resource for the sales teams and takes the lead for pricing policy, sales training and support for Java business in EMEA (Europe, Middle-East & Africa). Jon has more than 10 years' experience in pre-sales technical support and consultancy in the IT industry with two major software development tool vendors. In more recent years, Jon has focused on the emerging areas of distributed object computing including CORBA, EJB, and J2EE. Jon is an entertaining and popular speaker with a proven track record in presenting technical subjects in an interesting and easy to understand way.

Foredragsholder innen: MDA Jon Oldevik er forsker ved SiNTEF Tele og data, avdeling for Distribuerte Informasjonssystemer i Oslo. Han har lang erfaring med programvarearkitektur, systemutviklingsmetoder, produktfamilier, modellering, kodegenerering og implementasjon av distribuerte og komponentbaserte systemer. Utvikling og bruk av verktøy for modelldrevet utvikling har vært et spesielt fokusområde.

Foredragsholder innen: MiddleGen, XDoclet Hjemmeside: http://boss.bekk.no/boss/middlegen/ Eivind Waaler Eivind Waaler jobber som senior konsulent i BEKK. Han har mange års erfaring med utvikling og arkitektur av J2EE løsninger. Eivind er tilhenger av Open Source software, og har det siste året vært aktiv utvikler på Middlegen prosjektet. Han har stor kompetanse på Open Source produkter og benytter disse i stor grad på sine prosjekter og løsninger. Eivind har tidligere holdt foredrag om XDoclet og Middlegen på JavaBin.

Foredragsholder innen: Hibernate, OR-rammeverk Hjemmeside: http://www.objectware.no Bjørn Vidar Bøe har en MSc Software Engineering og en BSc Informatics. Han jobber som konsulent hos Objectware og driver hovedsakelig med utvikling på Java-plattform.

Foredragsholder innen: MDA Grotens joined Compuware in 1996. His key responsibility is to conduct market research and analysis to support the strategic and technical direction of Compuware's application development and integration products, including OptimalJ. Grotens is also responsible for ensuring knowledge transfer to Compuware's local technical and field sales teams. Prior to joining Product Management he held technical and sales support roles in Compuware's Dutch organization. Grotens also worked for Origin, a Dutch-based Systems Integrator, in a variety of positions but primarily in the telecommunications branch. He holds a degree in computer science.


Foredragsholder innen: Software methodology, J2EE, EJB, Jini, J2ME Hjemmeside: http://totto.org Thor Henning Hetland Speaker on several conferences including JavaZone, OMG Information Days and various others. With over 20 years of professional programming experience spawning quite a few programming languages he has contributed in both international and domnestic projects n various roles, including Project leader, technology mentor, technology strategist and trainer.

John Crupi JOHN CRUPI is a Distinguished Engineer and the Chief Java Architect in Sun Software Services. He has over 17 years of experience in distributed object computing and remains focused on creating reusable, scalable J2EE architectures and bringing patterns to the next level. He is co-author or Core J2EE Patterns 1st and 2nd edition.


Foredragsholder innen: Service Oriented Architecture Bjørn Bjerkeli Bjørn Bjerkeli currently works as a Senior Consultant in Zenior AS, a Norwegian consulting company. Bjørn has been implementing large-scale distributed systems in J2EE and CORBA for insurance companies, banks and major European telceom providers since 1997. He has been working for companies like Nokia and Sybase among others. Although Bjørn often spends much of his time in design and mentoring, he enjoys it when he is engaged in serious coding and development.

Atle Krokeide, born in 1966, is educated from the department of Computer Science at NTNU in Trondheim and has 12 years of experience with software development and project management. His experience includes 3 years with Cap Gemini working with real-time testing systems for the European Space Agency, 6 years with Ericsson working with Network Management systems in both fixed and mobile networks; as a developer, project manager and group manager. The last 3 years he has been working with Bouvet AS as system developer and project manager, most recently with the real-time feed project for the Nordic Power Exchange - Nord Pool.

Foredragsholder innen: Sikkerhet Hjemmeside: http://www.kantega.no Gunnar Nordseth er teknologisjef i Kantega AS (www.kantega.no). Han har utdannelse innenfor fysikk og matematikk fra NTNU (tidligere NTH). I Kantega har han ansvar for å lede satsningen på løsninger og tjenester for digital identitet, og har blant annet vært involvert i prosjektet for utvikling av SpareBank 1s pilotløsning for BankID. Hans interessefelt omfatter informasjonssikkerhet, objektmetodikk og utviklingsprosess.

Foredragsholder innen: Java vs .NET Hjemmeside: http://www.systek.no/ Johannes Brodwall har jobbet i flere år som konsulent innen Java og J2EE. Før Java jobbet han med COM og Window 32. Det siste halv året har han vært teknisk prosjektleder og arkitekt for et nyutviklingsprosjekt i .NET. Johannes kjenner begge plattformene godt, og synes de har sine individuelle styrker og svakheter. Han jobber (nesten) like gjerne med begge to.

Foredragsholder innen: MIDP 2.0 and J2ME 2.0 Ariel Levin has worked in the area of OO since 1990 (Smalltalk) and has been working with Java (the Java 2 Platform, Standard Edition [J2SE]) since 1997. In 2000, Levin joined Sun Microsystems as one of the Java 2 Platform, Micro Edition (J2ME), Wireless Toolkit team members.

Foredragsholder innen: J2ME Hjemmeside: http://www.objectnet.no Helge Gundersen jobber som konsulent i Objectnet hvor han engasjeres i utviklingen av forretningskritiske systemer basert på Java-teknologi. Helge er utdannet sivilingeniør med fordypning innen mobilkommunikasjon og åpne distribuerte systemer.
Henning Kvalheim jobber som konsulent i Objectnet. Objectnet er et uavhengig konsulentselskap som bistår kunder i valg og utvikling av fremtidsrettede løsninger. Objectnet representerer faglig tyngde og spiss­kompetanse innen objekt­orientert systemutvikling, både på prosess- og teknikksiden. Objectnet har lang prosjekterfaring og er en leverandør av objektorienterte, åpne, distribuerte systemer i en flerlagsarkitektur.
Hjemmeside: http://www.objectnet.no Rune Melhus er født i 1973 og er utdannet ved Ingeniørhøgskolen i Trondheim. Han har jobbet med objektorienterte systemer siden 1997 og arbeidserfaringen omfatter 4 år med utvikling i C++ hos SuperOffice samt to år med utvikling i Java hos Objectnet. Hos sistnevnte har han jobbet mest med nummerportering og distribuerte systemer.

Foredragsholder innen: MIDP 2.0 and J2ME 2.0 Ariel Levin has worked in the area of OO since 1990 (Smalltalk) and has been working with Java (the Java 2 Platform, Standard Edition [J2SE]) since 1997. In 2000, Levin joined Sun Microsystems as one of the Java 2 Platform, Micro Edition (J2ME), Wireless Toolkit team members.

Foredragsholder innen: MIDP game development Tonny Espeset er grunder av firmaet Plutonium Software AS, som har markert seg på verdensbasis med spisskompetanse på mobil-teknologi, og da særlig interaktiv Java basert underholdning. Han har vært aktiv i Java miljøet lenge, og er blant annet kjent som forfatteren av boken KickAss Java Programming, utgitt av et Amerikansk forlag og oversatt til en lang rekke språk. Han har også vunnet mange priser for sitt arbeid, blant annet Gulltaggen, Sime awards og JARS 1%. For tiden jobber han mest med brobygging mellom levedyktige forretningsmodeller og ny teknologi.

Java Technology Evangelis ( Sun Microsystems ) Raghavan Srinivas is a Java Technology Evangelist at Sun Microsystems. He specializes in Java technology and distributed systems. He is a proponent of Java technology and teaches undergraduate and graduate classes in the evening. He has spoken on a variety of technical topics at conferences around the world. Raghavan brings with him 15 years of software development experience having worked for Digital Equipment Corporation before joining Sun. He has worked on several technology areas, including internals of VMS, UNIX[r] and Windows NT. Raghavan holds a Master's degree in Computer Science from the Center of Advanced Computer Studies at the University of Southwestern Louisiana. He enjoys running, hiking and eating spicy food.

( ThoughtWorks )

( Curbralan Ltd ) Kevlin Henney is an independent consultant and trainer based in the UK. The focus of his work is in programming languages, OO, CBD, UML, patterns and software architecture. He is a columnist for C/C++ Users Journal (online), Application Development Advisor (UK) and JavaSpektrum (Germany), and previously wrote columns in Java Report and C++ Report. He is also a popular speaker at conferences in the US and Europe.

Associate professor ( University of Bergen ) Khalid A. Mughal is an associate professor at the Department of Informatics, University of Bergen, Norway. During his extensive career, he has designed and implemented many courses on Java, object-oriented system development, and compiler techniques. For the past four years he has been responsible for developing and running a web-based programming course in Java, which is offered to off-campus students. Apart from giving courses at other universities and colleges, he also gives seminars on Java-related technologies for the IT industry. He is the principal author of the book: A Programmer's Guide to Java Certification (Second Edition), Addison-Wesley, ISBN 020172828, 2003. He is also the principal author of an introductory Norwegian textbook on programming in Java: Java som første programmeringsspråk/Java as First Programming Language (2. utg.), Cappelen Akademisk Forlag, ISBN 82-02- 23274-0, 2003. Apart from keeping abreast with the developments in the Java programming language, his current work involves applying Object Technology in the development of learning content management systems.

utvikler/arkitekt ( BBS ) Johannes Brodwall har mange års fartstid som konsulent innen utviking på Java-plattformen, og jobber nå på BBS som utvikler/arkitekt med framtidens regningsbetalingssystemer. Han har hold foredrag på begge de tidligere JavaZone (J2ME, Java versus .NET). Han har studert eXtremeProgramming i lengre tid, og brukt mange av teknikkene i prosjekter de siste par årene. Johannes er også medlem av styret for interesseorganisasjonen extremeprogramming.no. Han bruker test-drevet utvikling i sitt daglige arbeid, og har også vist teknikken på foredrag før.
( Favourite Systems ) Trond Pedersen is a consultant for Favourite Systems. Lately, he has been working with mobile devices, including mobile phones and on-truck computers for the petroleum industry. He is a co-founder and active member of extremeprogramming.no.

Technical Evangelist, Product Mgr, Developer, Author ( Oracle ) Steve Muench is a Consulting Product Manager, Developer, and Author in the J2EE Developer Tools Division at Oracle Corporation. In his fifteen years at the company, he's been deeply involved in the development, support, and technical evangelism of Oracle's XML technologies and application development tools. Steve helps internal development teams and external customers make the most out of Oracle's XML technologies and its best-practice J2EE design patterns framework, Oracle ADF. In 2000, he authored "Building Oracle XML Applications" from O'Reilly and is a frequent presenter at Oracle and Java conferences.

Technical Business Development Manager ( Borland Nordic ) Björn joined Borland when the Nordic office in Stockholm started up in July 2001 and brings over 18 years’ experience in the IT industry. He is specialized in the Borland Java, J2EE and CORBA product lines. Björn is an accomplished speaker and has presented at many conferences, seminars and training courses throughout Scandinavia and Europe. Prior to joining Borland, Björn has worked in the roles of systems architect, systems administrator, developer, designer, teacher and consultant, with a focus on Java, SQL, J2EE and distributed systems.

Enterprise Architect ( Microsoft ) Enterprise Architect med hovedfokus på Financial Services. Har jobbet som arkitekt og fagsjef på integrasjon 7 år i Storebrand.
Enterprise Architect ( Microsoft ) Rune Zakariassen: Enterprise Architect med hovedfokus på Oil & Gas. Har jobbet som integrasjonsarkitekt 6 år i Accenture.

( Gilb ) Tom Gilb is a freelance consultant, teacher and author serving clients in Europe, India, Korea, Japan and the US. He has written "Principles of Software Engineering Management" (1988) and is Principal author of "Software Inspection" (1993). He specializes in software quality design and management. He wrote "Software Metrics" (1976) which coined the term, and officially (via Radice, IBM) laid the basis for much of CMM Level Four. He lives in Norway, when he is not travelling. He has a residence in London too. His most recent papers, book manuscripts and slides are available on www.Gilb.com. His most recent book manuscript is: "Competitive Engineering: A Handbook for Systems & Software Engineering Management using Planguage." (free on the website) is based on well defined terms, processes and specification standards. It will help at all CMM levels and beyond. His well-known large clients include Symbian, BAA (British Airports Authority), Citigroup, Sony, Canon, Intel, Nokia, Ericsson, Synopsys, Philips, Microsoft, IBM, HP, Boeing, US DoD, UK MoD, Nortel, Motorola, Alcatel and many others.

( Bekk Consulting ) Trond Arve Wasskog is a Java architect working at Bekk Consulting. He has been involved in Java and J2EE application development for eight years, focusing on developer productivity, quality improvement and testing. Currently he is the leader of the Open Source and Development Architecture competency group in Bekk Consulting.

( Simula Research Laboratory ) PhD candidate at the Simula Research Laboratory with a masters in software quality engineering and a bachelors in systems & computer engineering. ocl2js principal developer.

Senior konsulent ( BEKK ) Eivind Waaler jobber som senior konsulent i BEKK. Han har mange års erfaring med utvikling og arkitektur av J2EE løsninger. Eivind er tilhenger av Open Source software, og har det siste året vært aktiv utvikler på Middlegen prosjektet. Han har stor kompetanse på Open Source produkter og benytter disse i stor grad på sine prosjekter og løsninger. Eivind har tidligere holdt foredrag om XDoclet og Middlegen på JavaBin.

Senior consultant ( Bekk Consulting AS ) Vidar Kongsli is a senior consultant with Bekk Consulting AS, and works as a system developer and architect, focusing on groupware and web publishing solutions.


( Accenture ) - Jobbet i Accenture i 5 år - Ferdig siving. NTNU -98 - Jobbet med Java siden 1997 - Jobbet mye med J2EE/WebSphere/WebLogic siden 2000 - Jobbet mye med XML/WebServices/OpenSource (Struts, Eclipse, Ant etc..) - Utnevnt til BEA Deputy CTO av BEA for arbeid jeg har gjort med BEA 8.1 Platform for ulike kunder - Påbegynt Sun Certified Enterprise Architect (tatt del 1, sliter å fullføre all UMLen!) - Medlem i Accentures globale satsning på teknisk arkitektur: GACT - Jobbet som konsulent for store norske, nordiske og europeiske kunder innen bank/finans, telekom, det offentlige og våpenindustrien

Chief Architect ( Compuware ) Chief Architect of Compuware's Application Development and Integration products Wim Bast is Chief Architect at Compuware's Application Development and Integration Centre in Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Bast is responsible for the core architecture of Compuware's Java development and integration solution, Compuware OptimalJ. He has worked for the Company for more than seven years, primarily focusing on integrating standard technologies, such as MDA and Java, into Compuware's tools. As Compuware's main technical representative at the Object Management Group, Bast is directly involved in the development of the Model Driven Architecture (MDA) and its related standards, such as Meta Object Facility (MOF). He initiated the submission of the MOF 2.0 Query, View and Transformation Request for Proposal to the OMG. Bast is Compuware's MDA expert, specializing in programming and modeling languages, as well as meta-modeling. He is co-author of the book MDA Explained: The Model Driven Architecture: Practice and Promise. He is a respected speaker on the topics of Unified Modeling Language (UML) and Model Driven Architecture (MDA). Prior to joining Compuware, he worked as an information analyst and developed tools for meta-data exchange between development and design tools. Wim has just been added to The Middleware Company's Whos who in Enterprise Java 2004: http://www.middleware-company.com/whoswho/.

Distinguished Engineer and Chief Java Architect ( Sun Software Services ) JOHN CRUPI is a Distinguished Engineer and the Chief Java Architect in Sun Software Services. He has over 17 years of experience in distributed object computing and remains focused on creating reusable, scalable J2EE architectures and bringing patterns to the next level. He is co-author or Core J2EE Patterns 1st and 2nd edition.

Technical Evangelist, Product Mgr, Developer, Author ( Oracle ) Steve Muench is a Consulting Product Manager, Developer, and Author in the J2EE Developer Tools Division at Oracle Corporation. In his fifteen years at the company, he's been deeply involved in the development, support, and technical evangelism of Oracle's XML technologies and application development tools. Steve helps internal development teams and external customers make the most out of Oracle's XML technologies and its best-practice J2EE design patterns framework, Oracle ADF. In 2000, he authored "Building Oracle XML Applications" from O'Reilly and is a frequent presenter at Oracle and Java conferences.

Richard Stallman is the founder of the GNU Project, launched in 1984 to develop the free software operating system GNU. The name ``GNU'' is a recursive acronym for ``GNU's Not Unix''. GNU is free software: everyone is free to copy it and redistribute it, as well as to make changes either large or small. Non-free software keeps users divided and helpless, forbidden to share it and unable to change it. A free operating system is essential for people to be able to use computers in freedom. Today, Linux-based variants of the GNU system, based on the kernel Linux developed by Linus Torvalds, are in widespread use. There are estimated to be some 20 million users of GNU/Linux systems today. Richard Stallman is the principal author of the GNU Compiler Collection, a portable optimizing compiler which was designed to support diverse architectures and multiple languages. The compiler now supports over 30 different architectures and 7 programming languages. Stallman also wrote the GNU symbolic debugger (gdb), GNU Emacs, and various other programs for the GNU operating system. Stallman graduated from Harvard in 1974 with a BA in physics. During his college years, he also worked as a staff hacker at the MIT Artificial Intelligence Lab, learning operating system development by doing it. He wrote the first extensible Emacs text editor there in 1975. He also developed the AI technique of dependency-directed backtracking, also known as truth maintenance. In January 1984 he resigned from MIT to start the GNU project. Stallman received the Grace Hopper award for 1991 from the Association for Computing Machinery, for his development of the first Emacs editor. In 1990 he was awarded a Macarthur foundation fellowship, and in 1996 an honorary doctorate from the royal institute of Technology in Sweden. In 1998 he received the Electronic Frontier Foundation's pioneer award along with Linus Torvalds. In 1999 he received the Yuri Rubinski award. In 2001 he received a second honorary doctorate, from the University of Glasgow, and shared the Takeda award for social/economic betterment with Torvalds and Ken Sakamura. In 2002 he was elected to the US National Academy of Engineering, and in 2003 to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. In 2003 he was named an honorary professor of the Universided Nacional de Ingenieria in Peru, and received an honorary doctorate from the Free University of Brussels.

( Objectware AS ) MSIS, University of Pittsburgh Ole Andre Ranvik is a senior consultant working for Objectware AS. He has specialized in J2EE web development and is a Sun certified web component developer. He is an early adopter of several web-centric technologies, such as Struts MVC framework and JSR 168 portlet specification.

( IBM ) Oliver Koeth is working at the IBM WebSphere Portal lab in Germany as Portlet Runtime Techincal Lead. He received his master degree in computer science in 2001. Oliver has been involved in many different areas of IBM WebSphere Portal server, including the development of the IBM Portlet API and the JSR 168 API.

Chief Technologist, Europa, Midt-Østen og Afrika ( BEA ) Jim har 10 års erfaring og er en av de mest kompetente på dette feltet i EMEA.

Chief consultant ( Kantega ) Chief consultant in Kantega. 13 years of experience in the software industry, 4 years of experience with J2EE as a developer and architect. Special interests include programming languages, design patterns and frameworks.

( Telenor ) Kristian har arbeidet 4,5 år i Accenture, og siden et par år i Telenor Networks, og er arkitektur-/teknisk ansvarlig for Metro2-plattformen.
( Accenture ) Otto har arbeidet i Accenture siden 1998 innenfor fagområdene teknologi og arkitektur, med fokus på Java.

Sjefskonsulent ( Mesan AS ) Foredragsholderen Carl-Olav Løvald, er Sjefskonsulent i Mesan AS. Han er en ledende kapasitet på MDA, og har blant annet vært brukt som foredragsholder på Universitetet I Oslo, Eurpean Conference on Object Oriented Programming (ECOOP) 2004 og som bidragsyter til ulike teknologianalyser.

President and consultant ( Domain Language ) Eric Evans specializes in domain modeling and design in large business systems and is the author of Domain-Driven Design, (Addison-Wesley 2003). Since the early 1990s, he has worked on projects developing object-oriented software in both business and technical domains. In the last four years, he has coached and trained teams in Extreme Programming and on the integration of agile development processes into diverse projects. Having repeatedly faced the challenges of creating complex business logic in elaborate technical architectures such as J2EE, and seeing how technology and other factors can overwhelm a project, Eric has concentrated on ways to focus software design effort on core business value, and on ways to design the core of a system so that it can keep pace with business needs and opportunities

Konsulent ( Objectnet as ) Rune Melhus jobbet med applikasjonsutvikling siden 1997 og har de siste årene fokusert på arkitektur og utvikling av forretningskritiske applikasjoner for håndholdte terminaler.
Systemutvikler ( Objectnet as ) Gunnar Velle er systemutvikler i Objectnet as, og har det siste året jobbet mest med løsninger på håndholdte terminaler. Gunnar har en sønn som heter Jonas og de to er kjempekompiser.
( Unified Consulting ) Rune Storløpa har jobbet med utvikling av større distribuerte systemer siden 2001 med fokus på transaksjonshåndtering. Det siste året har han jobbet med håndholdte terminaler og deres plass i større systemer.

Senior Developer ( Sun Microsystems ) Kirill Kounik is a senior developer in Sun's J2ME Wireless Toolkit team. Kirill brings 9 years of software development experience, 5 of them with Java and J2ME development at Sun Microsystems. Before Sun he worked in Intel where he acquired rich knowledge of computer architectures and OS internals. Kirill presented at JavaOne 2002 and the Netherlands's JUG Java University event in 2003. Kirill holds a B.Sc. in Computer Science from the Technion (Israel Institute of Technology).

Seniorinnvikler ( Objectnet as ) Styremedlem i javaBin fra 2004 - portalgruppeleder og redaktør for java.no. Har jobbet på Java/J2EE-prosjekter siden 1999, først i Accenture og nå i Objectnet. Spesiell interesse for metode og verktøy med preferanse for "smidige" metoder og verktøy som hjelper en å fokusere på det man faktisk skal gjøre, uten å ta fra en kontroll og fleksibilitet. Setter stor pris på fellesskapet både faglig og sosialt i javaBin!

Student ( University of Oslo ) I'm a developer on the Maven 2 team and the project leader on the Continuum team. Currently studying at the University of Oslo spending my free time on Maven 2.

Senior Architect - Sun technology group Norway ( Sun Microsystems AS ) ● Jobber for Sun Microsystems i Oslo ● Sun Professional Services / Solution Technology Group ● Primære arbeidsoppgaver .. ● N1 spesialist ● Teknisk arkitektur design ansvarlig ● Teknisk faglig bakgrunn. Ansvarsområder; ● Automatisering ● N1 SPS / Jumpstart (Jet) / Live Upgrade / ++ ● System administrasjon
( Sun Microsystems ) ● Sun Professional Services / Solution Technology Group ● Primære arbeidsoppgaver .. ● Strategisk rådgivning innen datasenter driftsprosesser ● Rådgivning innen Service Management prosessorientering ● Business consulting; ofte i form av .. ● Total Cost of Operations analyser ● Return Of Investments analyser ● Overordnet teknisk arkitektur design .. ● Teknisk faglig bakgrunn, men har gradvis blitt prosess- og metode orientert

( ThoughtWorks ) Nils Christian er sivilingeniør fra NTNU med seks års erfaring med programvareutvikling som utvikler og arkitekt. Han har tidligere holdt foredrag om Java og Agile programvareutvikling for DND, javaBin og Universitetet i Oslo. Nils Christian jobber for tiden for ThoughtWorks, Inc. i London med systemintegrasjon og utvikling av store, distribuerte, objektorienterte applikasjoner.


( Ontopia ) Geir Ove Grønmo var med på å grunnlegge det norske emnekart-selskapet Ontopia AS i 2000. Han er utdannet ingeniør fra Høyskolen i Gjøvik og har jobbet med systemutvikling siden 1995. Geir Ove har lang erfaring med håndtering av strukturerte informasjonsmengder og utvikling av dokumenthåndteringssystemer og publiseringsløsninger. I tillegg har han inngående kunnskap om og erfaring med programmering, databaser og internetteknologi. Han skrev verdens første emnekart­motor (tmproc) i Python som åpen kildekode i 1999 og har vært hovedarkitekten bak Ontopias emnekartmotor i Java.

Senior Technical Staff Member at IBM ( IBM ) Adrian Colyer is a Senior Technical Staff Member at IBM and the leader of the AspectJ project on Eclipse.org. He is co-author of the book "Eclipse AspectJ: Aspect-Oriented Programming in Eclipse with AspectJ and AJDT", and in 2004 he was voted one of the top 100 innovators in the world by MIT Technology Review magazine. His time is divided between developing tools and technology to support aspect-oriented programming (AOP), helping groups inside and outside of IBM to adopt and apply the ideas, and writing and speaking on the theme of aspect-oriented software development. You can catch his blog at http://www.aspectprogrammer.org/blogs/adrian.

Associate professor ( University of Bergen ) Khalid A. Mughal is an associate professor at the Department of Informatics, University of Bergen, Norway. During his extensive career, he has designed and implemented many courses on Java, object-oriented system development, and compiler techniques. For the past four years he has been responsible for developing and running a web-based programming course in Java, which is offered to off-campus students. Apart from giving courses at other universities and colleges, he also gives seminars on Java-related technologies for the IT industry. He is the principal author of the book: A Programmer's Guide to Java™ Certification (Second Edition), Addison-Wesley, ISBN 020172828, 2003. He is also the principal author of an introductory Norwegian textbook on programming in Java: Java som første programmeringsspråk/Java as First Programming Language (2. utg.), Cappelen Akademisk Forlag, ISBN 82-02-23274-0, 2003. Apart from keeping abreast with the developments in the Java programming language, his current work involves applying Object-Oriented Technology in the development of learning content management systems.

( Interface21 ) Keith Donald is a core Spring project member and principal with Interface21, a global company led by the creators of the Spring Framework. An experienced developer and mentor, Keith has built applications for customers spanning a diverse set of industries including banking, network management, information assurance, education, and retail. He specializes in translating business requirements into technical solutions. Keith is the founder of the Spring Rich Client Project and co-lead of Spring Web Flow with Erwin Vervaet. Lately you can find him leading Spring training courses across the US and abroad, planning the upcoming "Spring Experience" event in Bal Harbour Beach on December 7th - 10th, and serving as a guest speaker on advanced Spring with the NoFluffJustStuff (NFJS) tour. References: The Spring Framework: http://www.springframework.org The Spring Experience: http://www.thespringexperience.com Interface21, Inc: http://www.interface21.com

President, J2Life, LLC ( J2Life, LLC ) Bruce Tate is a fifteen year veteran of the information technology profession. He has delighted hundreds of customers in a variety of roles from Internet development, to database performance and design sessions. He has served as CTO of two startups and also served as lead architect of various organizations. At IBM, Bruce filled a variety of roles, including Java proof of concept work, Java architectures, national sales and support, object oriented systems programming and database systems programming. He served on the certification board for the I/T profession, and has been a leader throughout his career. Bruce is named on eight IBM patents. As an independent consultant, Bruce is the author of five books, including the best-selling Bitter Java and Better, Faster, Lighter Java. He is the founder and principle author and editor for Manning's Bitter series. Bruce speaks at a variety of conferences and users groups spanning North America. Bruce is a strong persistence expert, a proven performance analyst, an adept architect and facilitator, and an excellent communicator. This makes him an outstanding choice for public speaking, performance analysis, design reviews and a wide variety of other engagements.

phd-student ( NTNU ) Presenter’s background: I.T.B. Ørstavik is a phd-student in applied linguistics and programming at HiST (AITeL) and NTNU (HF), Trondheim. The presentation is based on an experimental project going back three years and a project of six students/researchers this summer (NTNU has funded the construction of a large scale prototype with a compiling service and RTE for external use in 2005).

Systemutvikler ( Objectware ) Kristoffer Moum works as a consultant for Objectware. He has five years of experience as a J2EE developer and has approximately six months of experience with the Spring framework in two separate projects. He has a special interest in frameworks that make his life as a developer easier and more efficient. Kristoffer believes it is important to focus on producing business value and that this can be accomplished by choosing frameworks that abstract away as much unwanted complexity as possible - as well as make application code testing easy and funny.

Seniorkonsulent ( Objectware ) Bjørn Vidar Bøe har en MSc Software Engineering og en BSc Informatics. Han jobber som konsulent hos Objectware og driver hovedsakelig med utvikling på Java-plattform.

Seniorkonsulent ( Objectware ) Bjørn Vidar Bøe har en MSc Software Engineering og en BSc Informatics. Han jobber som konsulent hos Objectware og driver hovedsakelig med utvikling på Java-plattform.

President, J2Life, LLC ( J2Life, LLC ) Bruce Tate is a fifteen year veteran of the information technology profession. He has delighted hundreds of customers in a variety of roles from Internet development, to database performance and design sessions. He has served as CTO of two startups and also served as lead architect of various organizations. At IBM, Bruce filled a variety of roles, including Java proof of concept work, Java architectures, national sales and support, object oriented systems programming and database systems programming. He served on the certification board for the I/T profession, and has been a leader throughout his career. Bruce is named on eight IBM patents. As an independent consultant, Bruce is the author of five books, including the best-selling Bitter Java and Better, Faster, Lighter Java. He is the founder and principle author and editor for Manning's Bitter series. Bruce speaks at a variety of conferences and users groups spanning North America. Bruce is a strong persistence expert, a proven performance analyst, an adept architect and facilitator, and an excellent communicator. This makes him an outstanding choice for public speaking, performance analysis, design reviews and a wide variety of other engagements.

Practice Leader ( Virtuas Solutions ) Jeff Genender is a Practice Leader for Virtuas Solutions, an Open Source Strategy and consulting organization. He has over 16 years of Software Architecture, Team lead, and Development experience in multiple industries. Jeff authored "Enterprise Java Servlets", September 2001, Addison Wesley Longman, which was one of the first how-to books on properly architecting and developing enterprise class java web applications. Jeff also is currently authoring "JBoss Live", 2005, Sourcebeat. Jeff is currently an active committer and on the Project Management Committee for Apache Geronimo and has also contributed to a number of other open source projects. Jeff is an open source evangelist and has successfully brought open source development efforts, initiatives, and success stories into a number of fortune 500 companies, saving these organizations millions in licensing costs.

( Agitar ) Alan has over twenty year experience in the software industry including ten years as a application developer/tools developer/Project manager in the Mil-Aerospace sector with companies such as Ferranti, Plessey, Racal, SD Scicon, and Smiths; and 13 years in technical sales and technical management with Rational tech sales

Head of Jive Software's Professional Services ( Jive Software ) Heading up Jive Software's Professional Services organization, Patrick Lightbody has worked for various technology companies, ranging from well-established giants such as Cisco Systems to tiny Silicon Valley startups. Patrick is the author of Java Open Source Programming and WebWork in Action and spends his spare time contributing to various OpenSymphony projects, including WebWork and OSWorkflow. While he grew up in the heart of the Silicon Valley, Patrick now resides in Portland, OR enjoying the beautiful year round weather.

Founder of the Apache Maven project ( Mergere ) Jason van Zyl is the founder of the Apache Maven project and currently serves as the chair of its PMC. Jason is a co-founder of Mergere whose aim is to to promote the use of Maven technologies in the Enterprise. Jason currently serves as the Chief Architect at Mergere.
( Mergere ) Trygve Laugstøl is a developer on the Apache Maven and Continuum projects. He is currently working for Mergere.

Senior European Technology Evangelist ( bea ) Martin is the senior European technology evangelist and technology manager for BEA Systems Ltd. Based in the UK, Martin acts as BEA’s technical representative for Europe’s community of developers and architects. With 21 years of experience in the technology industry, Martin has a wealth of technical knowledge which serves him well in his roles as both analyst and press spokesperson. Martin is particularly interested in the direction that open source is moving and how this shapes the direction of the software industry. Martin has a deep technical understanding of all levels of support. Previously, he worked in the pre-sales team for BEA, where he had particular responsibility for the government sector. Prior to joining BEA Systems, Martin worked for Tandem where he focussed on fault tolerant Unix systems kernel support.

Seniorkonsulent ( BEKK ) Kristoffer Dyrkorn is a senior consultant at BEKK. He started developing Java-based applications in 1997 and is now focussing on information retrieval, systems integration and the use of open source toolkits such as Lucene, Castor and Hibernate. He enjoys working with all aspects of data searching - including usability, scalability and integration.

( Objectnet ) Thor Åge Eldby er konsulent på andre året ved Objectnet AS. Han har 10 års erfaring innen systemutvikling og har jobbet i Telenor Mobil, FairPlay International og LCC Europe. For seks år siden startet han å jobbe med Java som hovedspråk. Mesteparten av utviklingen har det gått på store applikasjonsservermiljø, men i det siste har utvikling av GUI og web-GUI kommet i fokus. Andre ting som Thor Åge finner interessant for tiden er dynamiske språk, J2ME og Spring.
( Objectnet ) Andreas Bade har over fem års erfaring i systemutvikling. Det siste halvannet året i Objectnet AS. Han har jobbet med programmering av både webløsinger og desktop-applikasjoner. Hovedfokus er Java-utvikling, men har også besøkt .NET-leiren. Han har tidligere jobbet i Accenture i litt over fire år. Hovedinteresser er Spring, J2EE, desktop-GUI og Hibernate.

( Accenture ) 5 years work experience in Accenture 3 years as J2EE Architect Intresser: - Integrasjonsarkitektur - Utviklingsarkitektur - Distribuerte Multimedia Systemer - Linux Bachelor in Computer Sience Soon to recieve MSc in Computer Sience

Product Line Manager for Together Products and modeling technologies for EMEA ( Borland ) Markus Hebach is the Product Line Manager for Together Products and modeling technologies for EMEA at Borland. He joined Borland 2002 with the TogetherSoft acquisition, and has a history of 12 years working with, or close to Borland in different areas. Markus studied computer engineering in Frankfurt (Germany), worked as a programmer with Pascal and 4GL-Languages, was an independent trainer for Delphi and co-founded a publishing company for Developer-Magazines. His position at Borland before taking his current role was senior technical consultant for UML and Together products with a total of 16 years experience in the software business. Markus is an accomplished speaker and has presented at many conferences, seminars and training courses throughout Scandinavia and Europe.

Konsulent ( Accenture ) Holger har vært konsulent i Accenture i 7 år og er med i Accentures "Global Architecture and Core technologies"-gruppe som fokuserer på teknisk arkitektur og grunnteknologier. Han har de siste 5 årene jobbet på J2EE prosjekter og har en spesiell interesse for sikkerhet i webløsninger. Han er IBM Subject Matter Expert og jobber for tiden som leder for arkitekturgruppen i et større J2EE prosjekt som benytter Hibernate og Spring på WebSphere og DB2 på z/OS.

Chief consultant ( Kantega ) Chief consultant in Kantega. 13 years of experience in the software industry, 4 years of experience with J2EE as a developer and architect. Special interests include programming languages, design patterns and frameworks.

Senior consultant ( Bekk Consulting AS ) Vidar Kongsli is a senior consultant with Bekk Consulting AS, and works as a system developer and architect. He has worked with enterprise solutions on various platforms for five years. He heads the security competency group in BEKK.

Practice Leader ( Virtuas Solutions ) Jeff Genender is a Practice Leader for Virtuas Solutions, an Open Source Strategy and consulting organization. He has over 16 years of Software Architecture, Team lead, and Development experience in multiple industries. Jeff authored "Enterprise Java Servlets", September 2001, Addison Wesley Longman, which was one of the first how-to books on properly architecting and developing enterprise class java web applications. Jeff also is currently authoring "JBoss Live", 2005, Sourcebeat. Jeff is currently an active committer and on the Project Management Committee for Apache Geronimo and has also contributed to a number of other open source projects. Jeff is an open source evangelist and has successfully brought open source development efforts, initiatives, and success stories into a number of fortune 500 companies, saving these organizations millions in licensing costs.

( Oracle ) Raghu R. Kodali is Consulting Product Manager and SOA Evangelist for Oracle application Server. Raghu leads next-generation SOA initiatives and J2EE feature sets for Oracle Application Server, with particular expertise in EJB, J2EE Deployment, Web Services and BPEL. Prior to product management, Raghu held Presales and Technical Marketing positions in Oracle Asia-Pacific, based in Singapore. Prior to Oracle, he worked as software developer with National Computer Systems, Singapore. He holds a Masters Degree in Computer Science, and is a frequent speaker at technology conferences. Raghu maintains an active blog - Loosely Coupled Corner - http://www.jroller.com/page/raghukodali

( Oracle ) Raghu R. Kodali is Consulting Product Manager and SOA Evangelist for Oracle application Server. Raghu leads next-generation SOA initiatives and J2EE feature sets for Oracle Application Server, with particular expertise in EJB, J2EE Deployment, Web Services and BPEL. Prior to product management, Raghu held Presales and Technical Marketing positions in Oracle Asia-Pacific, based in Singapore. Prior to Oracle, he worked as software developer with National Computer Systems, Singapore. He holds a Masters Degree in Computer Science, and is a frequent speaker at technology conferences. Raghu maintains an active blog - Loosely Coupled Corner - http://www.jroller.com/page/raghukodali

( Telenor AS ) Per has 14 years of experience in software development in fields reaching from space control systems to e-business and is currently working in Telenor AS on a large java enterprise system. During the last couple of years Per has been involved in open source development, and in addition to having developed Surrogate, he has also made important contributions to the AspectJ project.
( Telenor ) Daniel has been working with software development for 7 years.

( Conduct A/S ) Thomas Roka-Aardal (28) er utdannet fra Ingeniørhøgskolen i Oslo og har en bred bakgrunn fra mange aspekter rundt systemutvikling. Han fokuserer på robust og standard-basert utvikling i team og har erfaring fra forretningskritisk teknisk prosjektstyring, konfigurasjonsstyring samt build- og deploy-prosesser. Han sitter for tiden i Pareto prosjektet i Telenor Mobil med fokus på refactoring av J2EE mellomvareløsninger. Thomas bidrar også som ansvarlig for JBoss Reloaded.

Java architect ( Bekk Consulting ) Trond Arve Wasskog is a Java architect working at Bekk Consulting. He has been involved in Java and J2EE application development for ten years, focusing on software development, testing and quality. Currently he is responsible for competency development in BEKK, managing the Technology competency groups.

Software archtitect ( Statoil ) Software archtitect and lead technology officer for the whole TOPS portfolio. More than 20 years of experience with development of large systems and practical use of object oriented

Architect Specialist ( Bull ) Miguel Valdes Faura is an architect specialist in J2EE working for Bull. He obtained his degree in Computer Science from Rovira y Virgili University in Spain (Management Speciality) and his Master’s Degree in Information Technologies from the Universities of Nancy and Metz (France). He has worked in Spain in different European projects based on J2EE platform and Open Source application servers. He joined INRIA, the French Research Institute in Computer Sciences, on February 2001. Within a team of researchers dedicated to collaborative applications, the ECOO team, he started to work on the Bonita Workflow System. He soon got mad about workflows and the possible ways to implement smart functionalities easily based on J2EE features. Thanks to his enthusiasm, BONITA has been very successful, joining the ObjectWeb consortium, and gathering a large community of users. He is nowadays the principal architect of the JIAP project at Bull R&D France and he is working on components and services included in the next Bull Enterprise Service Bus platform. He is a regular speaker at international Java conferences: JavaOne, Internet Global Congress, Open Source World Conference, javaHispano Conference, ObjectWebCon…


Ted Neward is an independent consultant specializing in high-scale enterprise systems, working with clients ranging in size from Fortune 500 corporations to small 10-person shops. He is an authority in Java and .NET technologies, particularly in the areas of Java/.NET integration (both in-process and via integration tools like Web services), back-end enterprise software systems, and virtual machine/execution engine plumbing. He is the author or co-author of several books, including Effective Enterprise Java, C# In a Nutshell, SSCLI Essentials, Server-Based Java Programming, and a contributor to several technology journals. Ted is also a Microsoft MVP for Architecture, BEA Technical Director, INETA speaker, DevelopMentor trainer, frequent conference speaker, and a member of various JSRs. He lives in the Pacific Northwest with his wife, two sons, two cats, and eight PCs. Reach him at ted [at] tedneward.com or visit blogs.tedneward.com.

Head of Jive Software's Professional Services ( Jive Software ) Heading up Jive Software's Professional Services organization, Patrick Lightbody has worked for various technology companies, ranging from well-established giants such as Cisco Systems to tiny Silicon Valley startups. Patrick is the author of Java Open Source Programming and WebWork in Action and spends his spare time contributing to various OpenSymphony projects, including WebWork and OSWorkflow. While he grew up in the heart of the Silicon Valley, Patrick now resides in Portland, OR enjoying the beautiful year round weather.

Co-founder and CTO of Pivolis ( Pivolis ) In addition to being an active member of the Maven development team, Vincent Massol is the creator of the Jakarta Cactus framework. After having spent four years as a technical architect on several major projects, Vincent is now the co-founder and CTO of Pivolis, a company specializing in applying agile methodologies to offshore software development. He is the author of "JUnit in Action" and "Maven: A Developer's Notebook". Vincent lives in the City of Light, Paris, France.

( independent consultant ) Malcolm Sparks in an independent consultant, software developer and trainer. He has been developing software in Java since 1996, producing developer tools such as EJBHome and jcoverage. The role of modules in software development has been a personal focus for Malcolm since early 2001.

( Mesan ) Lars Reed er sjefskonsulent i Mesan AS. I roller som teknisk prosjektleder og arkitekt, har han gjennom årene bistått bedrifter med spisskompetanse på standarder, kvalitetskontroll og krav til struktur. Gjennom langvarige konsulentoppdrag, har han måttet ta sin egen medisin hva livssyklus og vedlikehold av store systemer angår.

( Google ) Knut Magne Risvik is a Technology Director at Google, holding a PhD from NTNU on Scalable Computing. Previously Risvik was part of Fast Search&Transfer from the inception, and recently he served as the Chief Architect for Yahoo.

( thinktecture ) Christian Weyer is co-founder of thinktecture (http://www.thinktecture.com/), a company aiding software architects and developers in realizing projects with .NET and distributed applications technologies. He is a world-wide recognized expert in distributed applications, XML, Web Services, and service-orientation. As a Microsoft MVP Solution Architect and one of the few independent Microsoft Regional Directors, he has made a name for himself in the developer community. He worked on projects focusing on Web Services-based interoperability between Java and .NET as well as between Java and COM/DCOM. Visit his Weblog at http://weblogs.asp.net/cweyer/ to find out more about Web Services and service-oriented integration, interoperability and programming, not just on the .NET platform.

Distinguished Engineer and Chief Java Architect ( Sun Software Services ) JOHN CRUPI is a Distinguished Engineer and the Chief Java Architect in Sun Software Services. He has over 17 years of experience in distributed object computing and remains focused on creating reusable, scalable J2EE architectures and bringing patterns to the next level. He is co-author or Core J2EE Patterns 1st and 2nd edition.

Chief Architect ( Compuware ) Wim Bast is Chief Architect at Compuware's Application Development and Integration Centre in Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Bast is responsible for the core architecture of Compuware’s Java development and integration solution, Compuware OptimalJ. He has worked for the Company for more than seven years, primarily focusing on integrating standard technologies, such as MDA and Java, into Compuware's tools. As Compuware’s main technical representative at the Object Management Group, Bast is directly involved in the development of the Model Driven Architecture (MDA) and its related standards, such as Meta Object Facility (MOF). He initiated the submission of the MOF 2.0 Query, View and Transformation Request for Proposal to the OMG. Bast is Compuware’s MDA and pattern expert, specializing in programming and modeling languages, as well as meta-modeling. He is co-author of the book ‘MDA Explained: The Model Driven Architecture: Practice and Promise’. He is a respected speaker on the topics of Unified Modeling Language (UML) and Model Driven Architecture (MDA). Prior to joining Compuware, he worked as an information analyst and developed tools for meta-data exchange between development and design tools.

CTO ( SymphonySoft ) Ross Mason is CTO with SymphonySoft in London. He has 10 years experience working mostly in Financial and Insurance sectors developing trading systems, straight-through processing systems and workflow integration solutions. Ross is the founder of the Mule project, a successful open-source ESB and JBI implementation that is being used in a variety of industries by companies such as HP, Sony, Deutche Bank and Vignette. Ross is one of the founding members of SymphonySoft; a company that delivers professional services and support for projects using Mule. He is based between London and Malta where he lives with his girlfriend. In his spare time enjoys wakeboarding and getting to the mountains to for snowboarding and apres-ski.

( Accenture ) Leif Arne er senior teknisk arkitekt i Accenture med 15 års erfaring fra bl.a. EA, SOA, EAI, J2EE og teknisk arkitektur. Han er også leder for Accenture's nordiske teknologi-satsning med spesialområde innen EA.
Arkitekt ( Accenture ) Tonny er teknisk arkitekt i Accenture med 7 års erfaring og har jobbet som konsulent for store norske, nordiske og europeiske kunder innen bank/finans, telekommunikasjon og det offentlige. Fokusområder er Java/J2EE, SOA, Integrasjon, BEA og OpenSource. Holdt presentasjon på JavaZone 2004 om prosjekt erfaringer med BEA 8.1 Platform.

( Curbralan Ltd ) Kevlin Henney is an independent consultant and trainer based in the UK. The focus of his work is in programming languages, OO, CBD, UML, patterns and software architecture. He is a columnist for C/C++ Users Journal (online), Application Development Advisor (UK) and JavaSpektrum (Germany), and previously wrote columns in Java Report and C++ Report. He is also a popular speaker at conferences in the US and Europe.

Product Manager ( Sun Microsystems ) Manyi Lu, manyi.lu at sun.com. Manyi Lu is working as product manager in the database technology group at Sun. She has long experience in developing the kernel of the High Availability Database (former Clustra).

( Statoil ASA ) Jørn Ølmheim is a software architect with the information technology unit of Statoil ASA. He has been working with enterprise application development and Java/J2EE for the last eight years, the last two years as senior developer and designer/architect. Current focus areas are process support through the use of software agents and other event oriented technologies and agile methods including domain-driven design.

Senior konsulent ( BEKK ) Eivind Waaler is a senior consultant and Java architect in BEKK. He has 6 years of experience with J2EE development. Eivind has had talks at the 2003 and 2004 JavaZone conferences about Hibernate and persistence layer code-generation.

Technical consultant ( HP ) Technical consultant with HP's software business unit Works with customers on implementing manageability for Java/J2EE/web services based applications.

Technical consultant ( HP ) Technical consultant with HP's software business unit Works with customers on implementing manageability for Java/J2EE/web services based applications.

Solutions Architect ( Objectware ) Anders Norås is a solutions architect working for Objectware (www.objectware.no) He has ten years of experience developing web applications using both Java and Microsoft technologies. His blog can be read at http://dotnetjunkies.com/weblog/anoras/

Editor-in-chief of JSF Central ( JSF Central ) Kito D. Mann is editor-in-chief of JSF Central (www.jsfcentral.com) and the author of JavaServer Faces in Action (Manning). He is also a member of the JSF 1.2 and JSP 2.1 expert groups, and a consultant specializing in enterprise application architecture, development, mentoring, and JSF product strategy. Kito has consulted with several Fortune 500 clients, including Prudential Financial and J.P. Morgan Chase & Company, and was recently the chief architect of an educational application service provider. He holds a BA in Computer Science from Johns Hopkins University.

Editor-in-chief of JSF Central ( JSF Central ) Kito D. Mann is editor-in-chief of JSF Central (www.jsfcentral.com) and the author of JavaServer Faces in Action (Manning). He is also a member of the JSF 1.2 and JSP 2.1 expert groups, and a consultant specializing in enterprise application architecture, development, mentoring, and JSF product strategy. Kito has consulted with several Fortune 500 clients, including Prudential Financial and J.P. Morgan Chase & Company, and was recently the chief architect of an educational application service provider. He holds a BA in Computer Science from Johns Hopkins University.

PhD ( Simula Research Laboratory ) The author recently completed a PhD in Empirical Software Engineering at the Simula Research Laboratory in Oslo - the subject being the practical usage of Software Design Patterns. This presentation is based on the three years of full-time research that went into the degree. The speaker is also a full-time developer and Chief Architect at SuperOffice ASA, and has 20+ years of experience.

utvikler/arkitekt ( BBS ) Johannes Brodwall har mange års fartstid som konsulent innen utviking på Java-plattformen, og jobber nå på BBS som utvikler/arkitekt med framtidens regningsbetalingssystemer. Han har hold foredrag på begge de tidligere JavaZone (J2ME, Java versus .NET). Han har studert eXtremeProgramming i lengre tid, og brukt mange av teknikkene i prosjekter de siste par årene. Johannes er også medlem av styret for interesseorganisasjonen extremeprogramming.no. Han bruker test-drevet utvikling i sitt daglige arbeid, og har også vist teknikken på foredrag før.

Father of Spring Framework ( Interface21 ) Rod is the father of Spring. The Spring Framework open source project began in February 2003, based on the Interface21 framework published with Rod's best-selling Expert One-on-One J2EE Design and Development. Rod is one of the world's leading authorities on Java and J2EE development. He is a best-selling author, experienced consultant, and open source developer, as well as a popular conference speaker. Rod's best-selling Expert One-on-One J2EE Design and Development (2002) was one of the most influential books ever published on J2EE. The sequel, J2EE without EJB (July 2004, with Juergen Hoeller), has proven almost equally significant, establishing a comprehensive vision for lightweight, post-EJB J2EE development. Rod has extensive experience as a consultant in a wide range of industries: principally, finance, media and insurance. He has specialized in server-side Java development since 1996. Prior to that, he worked mainly in C and C++. His experience as a consultant has led him to see problems from a client's perspective as well as a technology perspective, and has driven his influential criticism of bloated, inefficient, orthodox approaches to J2EE architecture, which have delivered very poor results for stakeholders. Rod is the founder of the Spring Framework, which began from code published with Expert One-on-One J2EE Design and Development. Along with Juergen Hoeller, he continues to lead the development of Spring. He regularly speaks at conferences in the US, Europe and Asia, including the ServerSide Symposium (2003, 2004 and 2005), JavaPolis (Europe's leading Java conference), and JAOO (2004). Engagements in 2005 include two presentations at JavaOne 2005 and a keynote at the JavaWorld 2005 conference (Tokyo, June). Rod serves in the JCP on the Expert Groups defining the Servlet 2.4 and JDO 2.0 specifications. Rod continues to be actively involved in client projects at Interface21, as well as Spring development, writing and evangelism.

Systemkonsulent / teknisk arkitekt fra Unified Consulting ( Unified Consulting ) Lars Lundby er systemkonsulent / teknisk arkitekt fra Unified Consulting. Han er Cand.Scient fra Informatikk på Blindern, med flere års erfaring fra J2EE/Java-basert systemutvikling. Han leder et av delprosjektene som tar for seg integrasjon av e-billetteringen i NSBs salgssystemer.

Senior engineer with Sun's Wireless Toolkit team ( Sun Microsystems ) Shlomo Swidler is an senior engineer with Sun's Wireless Toolkit team. He has more than 10 years of experience in software development, the past three years at Sun. Shlomo developed the Wireless Toolkit's WMA features. He has an engineering degree from The Cooper Union in New York.

Senior engineer with Sun's Wireless Toolkit team ( Sun Microsystems ) Shlomo Swidler is an senior engineer with Sun's Wireless Toolkit team. He has more than 10 years of experience in software development, the past three years at Sun. Shlomo developed the Wireless Toolkit's WMA features. He has an engineering degree from The Cooper Union in New York.

Sr. Marketing Manager, JCP Program Heather is a member of the Java Community Process (JCP) program office at Sun Microsystems. In this role she sets the marketing and communications strategy for the JCP program. She is responsible for outbound communications to the community, the JCP identity http://jcp.org , and ongoing research, such as the JCP online survey and jcp.org usability studies. She also manages advertising campaigns, sponsorships and events for the JCP program, including the community gathering at the annual JavaOne conference. Prior to Sun, Heather worked with a variety of technology and science companies, including Microsoft, Cisco, Roche Bioscience, Apple, and the Santa Cruz Operation. She holds a B.S. degree in Business Administration from California State University, with a minor in Strategic Marketing Management.

Father of Spring Framework ( Interface21 ) Rod is the father of Spring. The Spring Framework open source project began in February 2003, based on the Interface21 framework published with Rod's best-selling Expert One-on-One J2EE Design and Development. Rod is one of the world's leading authorities on Java and J2EE development. He is a best-selling author, experienced consultant, and open source developer, as well as a popular conference speaker. Rod's best-selling Expert One-on-One J2EE Design and Development (2002) was one of the most influential books ever published on J2EE. The sequel, J2EE without EJB (July 2004, with Juergen Hoeller), has proven almost equally significant, establishing a comprehensive vision for lightweight, post-EJB J2EE development. Rod has extensive experience as a consultant in a wide range of industries: principally, finance, media and insurance. He has specialized in server-side Java development since 1996. Prior to that, he worked mainly in C and C++. His experience as a consultant has led him to see problems from a client's perspective as well as a technology perspective, and has driven his influential criticism of bloated, inefficient, orthodox approaches to J2EE architecture, which have delivered very poor results for stakeholders. Rod is the founder of the Spring Framework, which began from code published with Expert One-on-One J2EE Design and Development. Along with Juergen Hoeller, he continues to lead the development of Spring. He regularly speaks at conferences in the US, Europe and Asia, including the ServerSide Symposium (2003, 2004 and 2005), JavaPolis (Europe's leading Java conference), and JAOO (2004). Engagements in 2005 include two presentations at JavaOne 2005 and a keynote at the JavaWorld 2005 conference (Tokyo, June). Rod serves in the JCP on the Expert Groups defining the Servlet 2.4 and JDO 2.0 specifications. Rod continues to be actively involved in client projects at Interface21, as well as Spring development, writing and evangelism.

( Gilb ) Tom Gilb is a freelance consultant, teacher and author serving clients in Europe, India, Korea, Japan and the US. He has written "Principles of Software Engineering Management" (1988) and is Principal author of "Software Inspection" (1993). He specializes in software quality design and management. He wrote "Software Metrics" (1976) which coined the term, and officially (via Radice, IBM) laid the basis for much of CMM Level Four. He lives in Norway, when he is not travelling. He has a residence in London too. His most recent papers, book manuscripts and slides are available on www.Gilb.com. His most recent book is: "Competitive Engineering: A Handbook for Systems & Software Engineering Management using Planguage." (Published July 8 2005) is based on well defined terms, processes and specification standards. It will help at all CMM levels and beyond. His well-known large clients include Symbian, BAA (British Airports Authority), Citigroup, Sony, Canon, Intel, Nokia, Ericsson, Synopsys, Philips, Microsoft, IBM, HP, Boeing, US DoD, UK MoD, Nortel, Motorola, Alcatel, FIRM as, Vianova, Western Geco (Schlumberger), Enlight as, GE (USA and Norway) and many others. He holds regular public courses in Norway with Programutvikling as (http://www.programutvikling.no/ ), and in London (http://www.testing-solutions.com/gilb/).

President and consultant ( Domain Language ) Eric Evans specializes in domain modeling and design in large business systems and is the author of Domain-Driven Design, (Addison-Wesley 2003). Since the early 1990s, he has worked on projects developing object-oriented software in both business and technical domains. In the last four years, he has coached and trained teams in Extreme Programming and on the integration of agile development processes into diverse projects. Having repeatedly faced the challenges of creating complex business logic in elaborate technical architectures such as J2EE, and seeing how technology and other factors can overwhelm a project, Eric has concentrated on ways to focus software design effort on core business value, and on ways to design the core of a system so that it can keep pace with business needs and opportunities

( VTT Technical Research Centre ) Prof. Pekka Abrahamsson is a senior research scientist at VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland. Currently, he is on leave from the University of Tampere where he is a full professor in the field of information systems and software engineering. His current responsibilities include managing an AGILE-ITEA project (http://www.agile-itea.org), which involves 22 organizations from 9 European countries. The project aims at developing agile innovations in the domain of complex embedded systems. His research interests are centred on mobile application development, business agility, agile software production and embedded systems. He leads the team who has designed an agile approach for mobile application development - the Mobile-D™. He has coached several agile software development projects in industry and authored 50+ scientific publications focusing on software process and quality improvement, agile software development and mobile software. His professional experience involves 5 years in industry as a software engineer and a quality manager.

( Simula Research Laboratory ) Magne Jørgensen received the Diplom Ingeneur degree in Wirtschaftswissenschaften from the University of Karlsruhe, Germany, in 1988 and the Dr. Scient. degree in Informatics from the University of Oslo, Norway in 1994. He has 10 years’ industry experience as a software developer, project leader and manager. He is now Professor in Software Engineering at the University of Oslo and a member of the software engineering research group of Simula Research Laboratory in Oslo, Norway. He has published many articles in international journals on software cost estimation. He has supported work on the improvement of software project estimation and has been responsible for estimation training in several software companies.
( Simula Research Laboratory ) Stein Grimstad received the MSc degree in Informatics from the University of Oslo, Norway in 1998. He has 7 years’ industry experience as software developer and solution architect. He is now a PhD-student in Software Engineering at the University of Oslo, and is a member of the software engineering research group of Simula Research Laboratory in Oslo, Norway. He also works part-time as an advisor at Objectnet. His research interests are software engineering and, in particular, software cost estimation.

Kristoffer Kvam jobber i Telenor Norge som funkjonell arkitekt og teamleder i CRM Forretningslogikk. Selv om tittelen kankje ikke antyder det, er Kristoffer fast fokusert på å holde fingrene skitne - minst 50% av tiden brukes til utvikling. Fokuset har vært variert innen applikasjonsplanlegging og -utvikling, men som konsulent og senere som fastansatt i Telenor har hovedfokus hele tiden vært på mellomvareløsninger på Javaplattform. Kristoffer er utvikleren og arkitekten bak XRadar.
Seniorinnvikler ( Objectnet as ) Styremedlem i javaBin fra 2004, var portalgruppeleder og redaktør for java.no det første året. Har jobbet på Java/J2EE-prosjekter siden 1999, først i Accenture og så i Objectnet. Spesiell interesse for metode og verktøy med preferanse for "smidige" metoder og verktøy som hjelper en å fokusere på det man faktisk skal gjøre, uten å ta fra en kontroll og fleksibilitet. Setter stor pris på fellesskapet både faglig og sosialt i javaBin!

Java, EJB og AOP ekspert Rickard Øberg er en internasjonalt anerkjent Java-ekspert som har spesialisert seg på avanserte mellomvarearkitekturer og en av de ledende autoriteter på EJB og J2EE. Han har skrevet boken "Mastering RMI", en avansert bok på utvikling av RMI-løsninger i Java og EJB. Rickard er en av de som har vært med å utvikle EJB spesifikasjonen fra SUN til det den er i dag. Han er også en av utviklerne på "core teamet" bak jBoss Application Server, applikasjonsserverenes svar på Linux. I tillegg jobber han på diverse OpenSource prosjekter, og har vunnet ikke mindre enn åtte konkuranser på Java applikasjons utvikling og J2EE servere. Rickard har vært foredragsholder på mange av de store Java konferansene og drar alltid mengder av tilhørere gjennom sin møte å fremføre stoffet på og hans ytterst tunge fagkunnskap. Rickard har også tidligere gjestet JavaBin flere ganger tidligere med foredrag om JMX, Porlets og AOP. Med sitt siste foredrag i AOP klarte han å vekke til live en het debatt som pågikk i flere uker etterpå. Han vil i år besøke JavaZone for å snakke om AOP for avanserte.

( ThoughtWorks ) Nils Christian is an agile programmer with seven years of experience in developing large, object-oriented, distributed applications for companies in various industries. He has previously presented on topics in Java and Agile software development at JavaZone, Agile, DND, javaBin and the University of Oslo. Nils Christian works for ThoughtWorks.

Chief Scientist ( SINTEF ) Tore Dybå is chief scientist at SINTEF (the Foundation for Scientific and Industrial Research at the Norwegian Institute of Technology) and a visiting scientist at the SIMULA Research Laboratory. He received his M.Sc. in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science from the Norwegian Institute of Technology (NTH) in 1986 and his Ph.D. in Computer and Information Science from the Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU) in 2001. Dr. Dybå worked as a consultant both in Norway and Saudi Arabia before he joined SINTEF in 1994. His research interests include empirical and evidence-based software engineering, software process improvement, knowledge management, and organiza­tional learning. Dr. Dybå is the author and coauthor of several publications appearing in international journals, books, and conference proceedings in the fields of software engineering and knowledge management. He is the principal author of the book Process Improvement in Practice: A Handbook for IT Companies, published as part of the Kluwer International Series in Software Engineering. He is a member of the International Software Engineering Research Network (ISERN) and the IEEE Computer Society.

SW development consultant ( Bouvet ) Ove H. Scheel is a SW development consultant currently employed in Bouvet AS. He was the lead designer and implementer of the framework for ELMER compliant Internet services at Oslo Kommune. He is an experienced developer who has been working with numerous methodologies and technologies over more than two decades. During the last years his main professional focus has been modeling, agile methods and Java related technology.

( Curbralan Ltd ) Kevlin Henney is an independent consultant and trainer based in the UK. The focus of his work is in programming languages, OO, CBD, UML, patterns and software architecture. He is a columnist for C/C++ Users Journal (online), Application Development Advisor (UK) and JavaSpektrum (Germany), and previously wrote columns in Java Report and C++ Report. He is also a popular speaker at conferences in the US and Europe.

Technical Coordinator ( UNINETT ) The speaker is employed by UNINETT, the Norwegian research network. He works on the FEIDE project as the technical coordinator for a national authentication service and has been involved in the design and development of this service since the project's inception.

Seniorkonsulent ( BEKK Consulting ) Per Mengshoel jobber som seniorkonsulent i BEKK Consulting og har jobbet med Java og J2EE utvikling siden 1998. Han har erfaring som systemutvikler, arkitekt og mentor fra mange forskjellige prosjekter og leder for tiden faggruppen Systemutvikling i BEKK.

( Accenture ) Henrik Lund-Hanssen, som leder Accentures nordiske gruppe av arkitekter innen J2EE og .NET. Han har 18 års erfaring med objektorientert utvikling og virksomhetskritiske systemer, og har ofte hatt rolle som arkitekt i slike prosjekter. Henrik gjør også kvalitetsgjennomganger og støtter arkitektene på prosjekter.
( Accenture ) Trond Isaksen, en av Accentures nordiske integrasjonsarkitekter. Han har 7 års erfaring med utvikling av integrasjonsløsninger og større J2EE-systemer. Trond jobber vanligvis som arkitekt i prosjekter, men han brukes også som en "Red Adair" - en som kommer inn og hurtig løser de virkelig vanskelige problemene.

( Sun Microsystems ) Bernt M. Johnsen jobber som senioringeniør for Sun Microsystems i Trondheim hvor han er teknologisk ansvarlig for arbeidet med Derby. Ble ansatt i Clustra i 2000 som ble kjøpt opp av Sun i 2002 hvor han har vært arkitekt for distribuert SQL-eksekvering, ledet implementasjon av JDBC driver og arkitekt for distribuert administrasjon av HADB (tidl. Clustra). Han har tidligere arbeidet med ekspertsystemer, kompilatorer, internett-protokoller og var arkitekt for noen av de første nettbankene i Norge.

( Simula Research Laboratory ) PhD candidate at the Simula Research Laboratory (Software Engineering Department) with a masters in software quality engineering and a bachelors in systems & computer engineering. Research interests include studying the costs and benefits of UML usage on real-world systems.

Product Line Manager for Together Products and modeling technologies for EMEA ( Borland ) Markus Hebach is the Product Line Manager for Together Products and modeling technologies for EMEA at Borland. He joined Borland 2002 with the TogetherSoft acquisition, and has a history of 12 years working with, or close to Borland in different areas. Markus studied computer engineering in Frankfurt (Germany), worked as a programmer with Pascal and 4GL-Languages, was an independent trainer for Delphi and co-founded a publishing company for Developer-Magazines. His position at Borland before taking his current role was senior technical consultant for UML and Together products with a total of 16 years experience in the software business. Markus is an accomplished speaker and has presented at many conferences, seminars and training courses throughout Scandinavia and Europe.

Software developer ( Gallagher & Robertson AS ) Sivilingeniør (M.Sc.) NTH Software developer with Gallagher & Robertson AS 7 years Java experience developing communications products Main architect and developer for G&R’s J2EE products

Prosjektdirektør ( BEKK Consulting ) Reidar Sande er Prosjektdirektør i BEKK Consulting med ansvar for selskapets prosjektledergruppe. Han har 12-års erfaring med prosjektledelse knyttet til utvikling av komplekse løsninger, de siste fem årene med fokus på J2EE. Han har det overordnede ansvaret for selskapets fokusering på smidige metoder.

( Sun ) Simon Ritter is a Java Technology Evangelist at Sun Microsystems. Simon has been in the IT business since 1984 and holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Physics from Brunel University in the U.K. Originally working in the area of UNIX development for AT&T UNIX System Labs and then Novell, Simon moved to Sun in 1996. At this time he started working with Java technology and has spent time working both in Java technology development and consultancy. He now specialises in looking at emerging technologies including grid computing, RFID, robotics and wireless sensor networks. Simon and his performing LEGO robots have appeared before audiences worldwide.

Worldwide sales lead ( IBM ) Adam Lieber is worldwide sales lead for WebSphere Application Server Community Edition having previously led the emerging markets iniatives for the product line. He is a co-founder of Gluecode Software, acquired by IBM in 2005 to form the basis of CE. At Gluecode he was responsible for sales and partnership activities. Prior to Gluecode, he was an IT and services focused venture capital analyst at the San Diego-based fund Mission Ventures. Graduated in Economics and Computer Science at Princeton, he also completed coursework at London School of Economics.

Senior Consultant ( zenior.no ) Ole Andre Ranvik is a senior consultant working for Zenior AS. He has specialized in JEE development and is a Sun certified web component developer. He has previously been doing a session at JavaZone on portlets.
Chief System Architect ( Western Geco ) Bjørn Nordmoen has a Master of Physics from University in Oslo (1983). He has been working with WesternGeco in the R&E department since 1983, where he has held various positions as developer, architect and manager. WesternGeco is a Seismic Company and develops its own advanced technical equipment, both hardware and software. Bjørn has been working as the Chief System Architect at Oslo Technology Center since 2001, where he overlooks and mentors the software architecture activities. A key focus is on improving the Quality of the software systems by using the principle of simplicity, automation and test-driven development process. The last two years Bjørn has been involved in an EU sponsored project called ModelWare, which focus on Model Driven Development and productivity improvements. He has also participated in the former OBOE and COMBINE EU-projects.

( Google ) Joshua Bloch is a Principal Engineer at Google. He was previously a Distinguished Engineer at Sun Microsystems and a Senior Systems Designer at Transarc. He led the design and implementation of numerous Java platform features, including the JDK 5.0 language enhancements and the Java Collections Framework. He is the author of the Jolt Award-winning book Effective Java. He holds a Ph.D. in Computer Science from Carnegie-Mellon University and a B.S. in Computer Science from Columbia.

( Google ) Joshua Bloch is a Principal Engineer at Google. He was previously a Distinguished Engineer at Sun Microsystems and a Senior Systems Designer at Transarc. He led the design and implementation of numerous Java platform features, including the JDK 5.0 language enhancements and the Java Collections Framework. He is the author of the Jolt Award-winning book Effective Java. He holds a Ph.D. in Computer Science from Carnegie-Mellon University and a B.S. in Computer Science from Columbia.

Per Mengshoel works as a developer and architect for BEKK. With valuable experience from working with enterprise Java for more than 8 years, he is now focusing on agile methods, testing and application management. He heads the Systems development competency group in BEKK.

Trygve Reenskaug has nearly 50 years experience with the development of professional software and software engineering methodologies. He is now a researcher and professor emeritus of informatics at the University of Oslo. He has extensive teaching and speaking experience including keynotes, talks and tutorials. His firsts include the Autokon system for computer aided design of ships with end user programming, structured programming and a data base oriented architecture in 1960. Object oriented applications and collaboration (role) modeling in 1973. Model-View-Controller, the world's first reusable object oriented framework, in 1979. OOram role modeling method and tool in 1983. The premier book on role modeling in 1995. He was a member of the UML Core Team, adding role modeling under the name of Collaborations. He is currently developing BabyUML, a new discipline for high level programming of object systems where a program = Data + Communication + Algorithm.

Software developer, architect and senior consultant ( Objectware ) Kaare Nilsen is a software developer and architect working as a senior consultant in Objectware AS. He has more than 10 years of programming experience and currently focuses on AOP and lightweight component containers. He also gives courses in AOP, where he has been secondary instructor to the AspectJ lead programmer Adrian Colyer, and maintains the AspectJ compiler plugin for Maven2.

Rikard Thulin is a Senior Software Engineer at IBS JavaSolutions. Rikard is one of the lead persons for the Java User Group in Gotenburg, JavaFroum. In a previous life, Rikard worked as a Java Architect at Sun Microsystems. Rikard holds a M.S. in Software Engineering.
Peter Lindh is a senior developer and technical architect at IBS JavaSolutions, a company specialized in Java/JEE mentoring, education and consultant services. Peter has over the years most been seen designing/implementing business critical, transaction intensive software on the JEE platform. Peter holds most professional certifications worth mentioning;-)

Solution Architect ( Objectware ) Anders Norås is a solutions architect working for Objectware (www.objectware.no) He has ten years of experience developing web applications using both Java and Microsoft technologies. His blog can be read at http://dotnetjunkies.com/weblog/anoras/

senior developer and architect ( ThoughtWorks ) Erik Doernenburg is a senior developer and architect at ThoughtWorks where he is helping clients with the design and implementation of large-scale enterprise solutions. Based on his experience with J2EE, Microsoft .NET and other environments, Erik is continually exploring new patterns of enterprise software. Erik has been an advocate of agile, test-driven, object-oriented development and Open Source software for many years.
Software engineer Gregor Hohpe is a software architect with Google, Inc. Gregor is a widely recognized thought leader on asynchronous messaging and service-oriented architectures. He co-authored the seminal book "Enterprise Integration Patterns and speaks regularly at technical conferences around the world. Find out more about his work at www.eaipatterns.com.

Kirk Pepperdine has more than 10 years of experience in OO technologies. In edition to his work in the area of performance tuning, Kirk has focused on building middleware for distributed applications.

Father of Spring Framework ( Interface21 ) Rod is the father of Spring. The Spring Framework open source project began in February 2003, based on the Interface21 framework published with Rod's best-selling Expert One-on-One J2EE Design and Development. Rod is one of the world's leading authorities on Java and J2EE development. He is a best-selling author, experienced consultant, and open source developer, as well as a popular conference speaker. Rod's best-selling Expert One-on-One J2EE Design and Development (2002) was one of the most influential books ever published on J2EE. The sequel, J2EE without EJB (July 2004, with Juergen Hoeller), has proven almost equally significant, establishing a comprehensive vision for lightweight, post-EJB J2EE development. Rod has extensive experience as a consultant in a wide range of industries: principally, finance, media and insurance. He has specialized in server-side Java development since 1996. Prior to that, he worked mainly in C and C++. His experience as a consultant has led him to see problems from a client's perspective as well as a technology perspective, and has driven his influential criticism of bloated, inefficient, orthodox approaches to J2EE architecture, which have delivered very poor results for stakeholders. Rod is the founder of the Spring Framework, which began from code published with Expert One-on-One J2EE Design and Development. Along with Juergen Hoeller, he continues to lead the development of Spring. He regularly speaks at conferences in the US, Europe and Asia, including the ServerSide Symposium (2003, 2004 and 2005), JavaPolis (Europe's leading Java conference), and JAOO (2004). Engagements in 2005 include two presentations at JavaOne 2005 and a keynote at the JavaWorld 2005 conference (Tokyo, June). Rod serves in the JCP on the Expert Groups defining the Servlet 2.4 and JDO 2.0 specifications. Rod continues to be actively involved in client projects at Interface21, as well as Spring development, writing and evangelism.

( JGoodies ) As architect and designer of Java tools, demos and several professional Swing libraries, Karsten Lentzsch is considered a leading expert in Java user interface technology and pluggable look&feel. He brings a wealth of experience in designing usable and elegant Java application to JGoodies. For over 15 years Karsten has been involved in object technologies and user interface design as a consultant, trainer, architect and expert developer. Since adopting Java programming early in 1997 he has designed and developed stand-alone applications, application frameworks, Java libraries and enhancements to the Java look. He publishes articles about Java UI topics and talks at major Java conferences.

Romain Guy: Romain has been working with Swing since 1998 and recently joined the Swing engineering team at Sun Microsystems. His main interests are rich clients design and development. Romain spends as much time as possible writing demos and applications that show the power of Java user interfaces. Past experience include talks at JavaOne and JavaPolis.

Staff Engineer ( Sun Microsystems ) Bernt M. Johnsen is Staff Engineer at Sun Microsystems' Database Technology Group in Trondheim, Norway. He joined Clustra (which developed a high availability distributed database) in 2000. At Clustra he was architect for distributed SQL execution and project leader for Clustra's JDBC driver. Clustra was acquired by Sun in 2002 and the database renamed to HADB. At Sun he was architect for HADB distributed management system. Earlier experience includes expert systems, compilers, internet protocols and he also pioneered Internet bank services in the late 1990s.

Bouvet ( Bouvet ) Yngvar currently works as a consultant for Bouvet AS with Java experience since 1997. His primary fields of interests within the Java sphere are AOP and UI development, especially the combination of the two. In the past he has held talks on these subjects for javaBin as well as workshops and courses with customers across the country.

Seniorkonsulent ( Objectware ) Bjørn jobber som seniorkonsulent hos Objectware, jobber til daglig med J2EE-basert utvikling. I det siste har han hatt fokus på tjenestebasert utvikling med produkter og teknologier som Spring, AOP og TopLink og han har også holdt foredrag på JavaZone i 2003 og 2005.

Founder of the Apache Maven project ( Mergere ) Jason van Zyl is the founder of the Apache Maven project and currently serves as the chair of its PMC. Jason is a co-founder of Mergere whose aim is to to promote the use of Maven technologies in the Enterprise. Jason currently serves as the Chief Architect at Mergere.
Trygvis ( Objectware AS )

Agile Coach ( Thoughtworks ) Patrick is a budding agile coach and hardcore agile developer who is currently working for Thoughtworks, a software development consultancy. He is driven by lightweight methods of delivery that means his team gets to write more code more often that delivers greater value. He is a big believer in self-empowered teams and achieves this by continually spreading the word about better ways of writing software. He believes Dependency Injection is an effective technique that leads to software that is more understandable by getting people focusing on objects and how they interact instead of simply writing code.

Lecturer at Letterkenny Institute of Technology in Ireland and PhD in the area of memory management of Object Oriented Programming Languages ( Letterkenny Institute of Technology ) A lecturer at Letterkenny Institute of Technology in Ireland, Dr Averil Meehan teaches Programming and Distributed Systems at undergraduate level as well as supervising MSc students. She has a PhD in the area of memory management of Object Oriented Programming Languages.

Technical Writer for Sun Microsystems on the NetBeans project ( Sun Microsystems ) Geertjan Wielenga has been a software technical writer for the past 10 years, working mainly on rapid application development and IDE's, currently on NetBeans, but previously on UNIFACE by Compuware and SuperNova by the now-defunct Four Seasons Software. He works for Sun Microsystems as a Technical Writer on the NetBeans project.

Part-owner of Maximum Solutions ( Maximum Solutions ) Heinz is a well-known contributor to the Java community through his Java Specialists Newsletter. Recently, he was chosen as a Java Champion. Heinz is part-owner of Maximum Solutions, a company specialising in Java software development and Java specialist training. Kabutz has worked on several large Java applications since 1997 (ranging from ½ to 1 million lines of Java code). He uses the experience gained "in the field" to write articles in his publication "The Java™ Specialists' Newsletter", which is read by thousands of Java Specialists in over 100 countries. In the newsletter, Kabutz explored topics such as reflection, Swing, patterns, dynamic proxies and the new features of JDK 5.0.

Software engineer Gregor Hohpe is a software architect with Google, Inc. Gregor is a widely recognized thought leader on asynchronous messaging and service-oriented architectures. He co-authored the seminal book "Enterprise Integration Patterns and speaks regularly at technical conferences around the world. Find out more about his work at www.eaipatterns.com.

Chieft Architect and co-founder of LogicBlaze, Co-Founder of Apache Geronimo, JSR 241 Spec Lead, JCP expert group member (JSR 52, 107, 127, 152, 174, 208, and 223) ( LogicBlaze ) James is the Chief Architect and co-founder of LogicBlaze. James co-founded LogicBlaze to deliver an open source-based Enterprise Transaction Platform for distributed organizations requiring secure, high-performance messaging, cache and cluster management solutions. Before founding LogicBlaze, James spent more than 20 years in enterprise software development. He has specialized in work for both financial institutions, including leading firms such as JPMorgan Chase, Nomura Research Institute, and Dresdner Bank, for middleware providers such NEON. Previously, James founded SpiritSoft, Inc., a company providing Enterprise Java middleware services. James is heavily involved in the open source community: he was one of the founders of the Apache Geronimo project (Apache's J2EE container), ActiveMQ, and Groovy and a number of other open source projects including dom4j, jaxen and Jelly. He currently serves as a member of the Apache project, and is an active committer on a variety of leading open source projects including Spring, Maven and Jakarta Commons. James also holds the role of Specifications lead on JSR 241 and sits on a number of other JCP expert groups including JSR 52, 107, 127, 152, 174, 208, and 223.

President, J2Life, LLC ( J2Life, LLC ) Bruce Tate is a fifteen year veteran of the information technology profession. He has delighted hundreds of customers in a variety of roles from Internet development, to database performance and design sessions. He has served as CTO of two startups and also served as lead architect of various organizations. At IBM, Bruce filled a variety of roles, including Java proof of concept work, Java architectures, national sales and support, object oriented systems programming and database systems programming. He served on the certification board for the I/T profession, and has been a leader throughout his career. Bruce is named on eight IBM patents. As an independent consultant, Bruce is the author of five books, including the best-selling Bitter Java and Better, Faster, Lighter Java. He is the founder and principle author and editor for Manning's Bitter series. Bruce speaks at a variety of conferences and users groups spanning North America. Bruce is a strong persistence expert, a proven performance analyst, an adept architect and facilitator, and an excellent communicator. This makes him an outstanding choice for public speaking, performance analysis, design reviews and a wide variety of other engagements.

CTO ( C24 ) John is CTO and co-founder of C24. Founded in 2000, C24 hit the market a year later with an innovated Java-binding technology for financial services messaging standards. Integration Objects (IO) can generate Java code for almost every financial services messaging standard, from FpML (including validation rules) to SWIFT. It's unique niche in the market has seen it OEM'd by many of the leading middleware, messaging and application server vendors. The largest clients now feed over $500million of trades a day through the code, the fastest process thousands of messages second. The wide coverage of C24-IO has given John a unique view into the internals of many of the world leading financial institutions. John has nearly 20 years in Investment Banking and over 25 years in IT, mostly as a consultant. He has co-authored several books on Java and J2EE, was the author of Learning Tree's distributed Java course and a regular speaker on grid, Jini and JavaSpaces in the Java and banking world. Over the years John has held more than one high-profile position as Head of Technical Architect in banks such as JPMorgan.

Architect Evangelist ( Microsoft ) Jürgen Pfeifer won his first programming award 1976 for a geographical survey solution he developed during his military service. Since then his passion is software. He worked as a systems engineer for Data General and Digital Equipment on their systems (AOS/VS and VMS) and started to work there with UNIX and Internet technologies in the mid-80ies. He finally worked there as project lead for large customer middleware projects. For a long time he worked as development engineer and later as architect for Software AG. There he worked on mainframes, UNIX, and Windows platforms, and architected middleware software that runs on all these platforms. He eventually became lead architect for large parts of their ENTIRE middleware technology, member of their internal architect council, and finally heads a team of architects to research a new generation of application development platform. He was also involved as architect in the initial design of the “TAMINO” XML database. In the late 90ies he joined Deutsche Bank and became an architect and project lead for their Internet payment technologies. In 1999 he joined Microsoft as a Principal Consultant, and since 2001 he is an Architect Evangelist in the Developer & Platform Evangelism group. In November 2005 he achieved the Microsoft Certified Architect credential. He graduated from the Heinrich-Heine-University in Düsseldorf (Germany) with a masters degree (“Diplom”) in mathematics and biology.

Kristoffer Dyrkorn is a Manager at Bekk Consulting. He has developed Java-based applications since 1997 and usually works as a systems developer, architect or project manager. The latest years he has focussed on search engines and on how to utilise technology to give users better functionality.

Technical Evangelist ( Sun Microsystems ) Gregg Sporar has been a software developer for over twenty years, working on projects ranging from control software for a burglar alarm to 3D graphical user interfaces. He has been using Java since 1998 and his interests include user interfaces, development tools, and performance profiling. He works for Sun Microsystems as a Technical Evangelist on the NetBeans project.

Patrick Linskey has been involved in object/relational mapping for 5+ years. As the founder and CTO of SolarMetric, Patrick drove the technical direction of the company and oversaw the development of Kodo. Now at BEA, he leads the EJB team in designing and implementation of the WebLogic Server EJB solution. Patrick is one of the leaders on the EJB3 and the JDO specification teams, and is BEA's representative on the EJB3 expert group. Patrick is involved in several industry consortia, serving as a luminary on JDOcentral and as the moderator on forthcoming JavaPersistence.com. He has been the face of standards-based persistence, having evangelized JDO and EJB Persistence in hundreds of talks throughout the world. Patrick is co-author of Bitter EJB, and is on the JAOO Conference Program Committee. Patrick has also worked for TechTrader, MIT's Media Lab and Bank One in various technical roles. Under Patrick's leadership, Kodo has become the market leading JDO implementation with over 350 customers throughout the world spanning all industries, and is now the basis for the WebLogic Server EJB persistence provider. Patrick holds a B.S. in Computer Science from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

( Interface21 ) Arjen Poutsma is a senior enterprise application architect with more than ten years of experience in commercial software environments. During these years, he has used both J2EE and Microsoft .NET. Three years ago, he started to specialize on Web Services and Service Oriented Architectures. In this period, he has conducted trainings, and has researched SOAs in large organizations. Arjen is the founder and the lead for the Spring Web Services project. This Spring project aims at facilitating development of document-driven Web services. Additionally, Arjen has contributed to various other open source projects, including XFire, NEO, and others. Since early 2005, Arjen is a consultant for Interface21 in The Netherlands. You can find his blog at blog.interface21.com/arjen.

Co-founder and Technology Evangelist of Tangosol Jonathan Purdy is co-founder and Technology Evangelist of Tangosol, a company which provides in-memory Data Grid solutions for reliable and scalable data access across the enterprise. Jon has a wealth of experience creating high-scalability and high-availability systems, with an emphasis on both analytics and transaction processing. His creativity and leadership in product design and development have produced several award winning and market leading products.

Seniorkonsulent ( Objectware AS ) Kristoffer works as a senior consultant at Objectware and has been working with Java and J2EE for six years. His focus has been in and around the Spring axis lately - as a developer as well as doing consulting, mentoring and having presentations on the topic. At the moment he is focused on frameworks that allow for short roundtrips when developing.

Principal Engineer ( IONA Technologies ) Andrea Smyth is a Principal Engineer at IONA Technologies and open source developer who specializes in web services and service oriented architecture. She has contributed to the reliability and configuration components in the Celtix ESB project and is currently a lead developer of the incubating Apache CeltiXfire project.

( Bouvet ) Rune Schumann is Senior Architect in Bouvet with experience since 1999 with large distributed Java systems. He as worked for several years as architect, developer and project manager with SOA systems both in telecom and the retail business. He has also held SOA talks both on international conferences and the Norwegian JUG as well. Author of the article "Evolutionary integration with ESBs" published at InfoQ in June 2007.
CTO and Co-founder ( MuleSource Inc. ) Prior to founding MuleSource Ross Mason was Chief Executive Officer of SymphonySoft Limited, an EU based company that provides services and support for open source integration projects. In 2003 Ross founded Mule, the leading Java-based integration platform and Enterprise Service Bus framework. Mule is being used by top-tier financial institutions and many other high profile enterprises in Telecommunications, Retail, Insurance and Government. Previously, Mason was Lead Architect for RaboBank and played a key role in developing one of the first large-scale ESB implementations in 2002. Mason holds a B.Sc. (Hons) in Computer Science from Bristol, UK.
Senior System Architect ( Bouvet AS ) Kjetil H.Paulsen is currently a Senior Software Architect at Bouvet AS, with experience since 1996. He as worked on several large distributed Java systems as an architect and lead developer, mainly in the finance business. Kjetil is also a javaBin (the Norwegian JUG) board member, which among other things hosts the annual well known JavaZone conference. Kjetil has also contributed to several open source projects.

CTO and Co-founder ( MuleSource Inc. ) Prior to founding MuleSource Ross Mason was Chief Executive Officer of SymphonySoft Limited, an EU based company that provides services and support for open source integration projects. In 2003 Ross founded Mule, the leading Java-based integration platform and Enterprise Service Bus framework. Mule is being used by top-tier financial institutions and many other high profile enterprises in Telecommunications, Retail, Insurance and Government. Previously, Mason was Lead Architect for RaboBank and played a key role in developing one of the first large-scale ESB implementations in 2002. Mason holds a B.Sc. (Hons) in Computer Science from Bristol, UK.

Consultant ( Bouvet ) Trond Strømme is a consultant currently employed by Bouvet AS. Previously he has worked with implementation of a more distributed architecture for one of Norway's biggest net banks and related performance and stability measures. Currently he's working as an architect for part of the new merchandizing suite of a large international retailer. Trond is a member of an internal group in Bouvet that specializes in application management, profiling and stability issues.

( Oracle ) Raghu Kodali is currently authoring a book on EJB 3.0 for Apress titled Beginning EJB 3 and is consulting product manager and SOA evangelist for Oracle Fusion Middleware. He leads next-generation SOA initiatives, J2EE, and Web Services feature sets for Oracle Application Server, with particular expertise in EJB, J2EE deployment, web services, and BPEL. Prior to product management, Raghu held presales and technical marketing positions in Oracle Asia-Pacific, based in Singapore. Prior to Oracle, he worked as a software developer with National Computer Systems, Singapore. He holds a master's degree in computer science and is a frequent speaker at technology and user group conferences like JavaOne, Oracle Open World, Sun Technology Days, JavaZone, JAOO, various JUG's and Oracle Developer Days with audience ranging from 100-1000. Raghu is also technical committee member for OASIS SOA Blueprints specification, and board member or Web Services SIG in OAUG, and he maintains an active blog at Loosely Coupled Corner.

Kjartan is working as a consultant at Objectware AS and has about 6 years of programming experience primarily working with J2EE. He has lately been focusing on Service Oriented Architecture and services in specific.

Professor ( NTNU ) Rolv Bræk is professor in systems development at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), Department of Telematics, Trondheim. He received his M.Sc. from The Norwegian Institute of Technology (NTH), Department of Telecommunication Switching Systems in 1969. Rolv Bræk has ten years experience as systems designer, project manager and technical manager of product development for the telecommunication industry. Products include ACD, CAMEX, TRIDEX and Garex-14 developed for G.A. Ring AS, and MAREIK developed for Elektrisk Bureau AS; all of which has been long living industrial products on the world market. His work included specification, design and implementation of fault tolerant and distributed computer systems including the operating systems and application software. During these projects he developed and applied the SDL Oriented Methodology, SOM, for specification and design of event driven real- time systems. He initiated and headed the work to develop a graphical editor for SOM, called DASOM, and an automatic program generator called ProgGen which were used industrially by Alcatel, Stentofon and others to automatically generate product quality code from SDL designs. Rolv Bræk played a central role in the national technology transfer program SISU and its follow up SISU II where a number of companies collaborated to improve their systems engineering practices. He was responsible for the methodology work within SISU and co-authored a textbook on methodology using SDL (published by Prentice Hall), and a CD based textbook on The Integrated Methodology, TIMe. Currently his main research interest is methods, tools and platform support for rapid and incremental service engineering based on UML2 collaborations. He is one of the initiators of PATS (Program for Advanced Tele Services), which is a network of excellence between Telenor, Ericsson, Compaq and NTNU. This program has built a world- class research and student laboratory jointly operated by NTNU, Telenor and Ericsson.
( NTNU ) Frank Alexander Kraemer has a master's degree (M.Sc.) in Information Technology from the University of Stuttgart. After finishing his master's thesis at the Department of Telematics at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU) in 2003, he joined the networked systems research group. Since then, Frank is working on his doctoral thesis with professor Rolv Bræk as supervisor. His main research field is the correctness-preserving development of services based on formal refinement techniques. Frank participates in the PATS/ARTS project that brings together industry, research and customers to develop methods, tools and platforms for the rapid development of telecommunication services. In this context, he created the Eclipse-based service engineering tool Ramses that combines modeling, model checking and code generation and that has been used in a number of student projects and is used engineering tool platform in the project. He has several years of experience with tool integration in Eclipse, starting with a project during an internship at IBM Germany.

Principal Consultant, Oracle Norge AS ( Oracle Norge AS ) Mr. Rustad have more than 5 years experience developing complex rule-based systems in Selvaag BlueThink AS. Selvaag BlueThink AS develops knowledge-based systems and methodologies to facilitate an industrialized approach in the construction industry.
System Architect, Selvaag BlueThink AS ( Selvaag BlueThink AS ) Mr. Engdal has more than 5 years experience developing complex rule-based systems in Selvaag BlueThink AS. Selvaag BlueThink AS develops knowledge-based systems and methodologies to facilitate an industrialized approach in the construction industry.

Senior Software Architect Sun Microsystems, Norway ( Sun Norway ) Jason Baragry is a Solution Architect with Sun Microsystems in Norway. He has a PhD in software engineering and 15 years of software architecture experience in pure research, applied research, and commercial projects.

Co-founder and Technology Evangelist of Tangosol Jonathan Purdy is co-founder and Technology Evangelist of Tangosol, a company which provides in-memory Data Grid solutions for reliable and scalable data access across the enterprise. Jon has a wealth of experience creating high-scalability and high-availability systems, with an emphasis on both analytics and transaction processing. His creativity and leadership in product design and development have produced several award winning and market leading products.

Senior system architect, Telio Telecom AS ( Telio Telecom AS ) - M.Sc. microelectronics, University of Oslo 1996 - Experience in ASIC design, military tactical networks, web design, project management, VoIP. - Now working at Telio Telecom AS - Lead of provisioning system development group

Web Developer and BEJUG Member It is in 1987 in Munich, Germany that Alexandre Snaps discovers his natural ability for computer languages and starts their studies and gets involved in different Open Source projects. In 1999, he plunges into web development and is hired as lead architect by “Toute la BD, sa” (project around French comic books that will be used as platform for many other projects). Three years later, he starts his own business, DOG7, focused on enterprise integration, for customers such as Thomson Multimedia, Technicolor, Lee Jeans. He is using Java technologies for web application development for over 5 years. He’s an active BeJUG member and speaker at JavaOne 2006.

Software Engineer and Tech Lead Bruce Johnson is a Google Software Engineer and Tech Lead of the Google Web Toolkit (GWT). Prior to joining Google, Bruce cut his product teeth as lead developer of AppForge's MobileVB product. His experience writing a Visual Basic cross-compiler was slightly fun (in a masochistic way), designing a portable version of Microsoft COM for non-MS embedded devices was much funner, but, without question, cross-compiling Java into JavaScript for GWT is the funnest. Despite his recent Java focus, Bruce will always be a Bjarne Stroustrup groupie, and he keeps a copy of D&E in his night-stand.

King – Hibernate Architect ( Jboss ) Gavin King is the founder of the Hibernate project. He was born in a country town named Mudgee in 1974 and has never been there since. He is currently based in Melbourne, Australia - the city with the world's highest ratio of restaurants to people. Gavin's interest in persistence was sparked at the age of 11 when his early software development efforts were all destroyed due to the notorious unreliability of the Commodore 64 cassette drive. Gavin studied mathematics at Monash University before deciding to do something useful instead. He now works for JBoss, Inc., developing Hibernate and the new Hibernate-based CMP engine - and hopes he has finally proved his usefulness. He is co-author of the book, Hibernate in Action, to be published by Manning. He is also involved in the EJB3 expert group. Gavin always enjoys writing about himself in the third person.

( BEKK ) Geir Wavik is working as a GUI programmer at Bekk Consulting. His experiences involves standards, testing and usability for the presentation layer.
( BEKK ) Vidar Alvestad is a Java architect working at Bekk Consulting. He has 11 years of experience in the software industry, and has been involved in java and J2EE application development for 7 years.

J2EE Technology Evangelist ( Oracle ) Jonas is a J2EE Technology Evangelist at Oracle. A native of Sweden, Jonas has worked in the software industry for more than 15 years. Prior to joining Oracle, Jonas worked at several major software companies in management, consulting, development, and project management roles. For the past 3 years, Jonas has been responsible for the JavaServer Faces, Oracle ADF Faces, and Oracle ADF Faces Rich Client product management in the Oracle JDeveloper team. Jonas is a popular speaker at international conferences such as JavaOne, EclipseWorld, EclipseCon, and JavaPolis, and has written numerous articles for leading IT magazines such as Java Developer's Journal, JavaPro, and Oracle Magazine. Jonas is author of the recently published book - Pro JSF and Ajax: Building Rich Internet Components, Apress.
Java architect ( TXE Systems ) John R. Fallows is a Java architect at TXE Systems. Originally from Northern Ireland, John graduated from Cambridge University in the United Kingdom and has worked in the software industry for more than ten years. Prior to joining Oracle, John worked as a research scientist for British Telecommunications Plc. Prior to joining TXE Systems, John worked as a JavaServer Faces technology architect at Oracle. John played a leading role in the Oracle ADF Faces team to influence the architecture of the JavaServer Faces standard and to extend the standard to provide Ajax functionality in the ADF Faces project. John is a popular speaker at international conferences such as JavaOne and JavaPolis, and has written numerous articles for leading IT magazines such as Java Developer's Journal. John is author of the recently published book - Pro JSF and Ajax: Building Rich Internet Components, Apress.

( Webmedia, Ltd. / Tartu University ) Jevgeni Kabanov is the lead architect of Aranea Web Framework. He is also both the R&D lead in one of the largest Estonian software development companies (Webmedia, Ltd.) and an enrolled researcher (Tartu University). For the past 3 years Jevgeni was involved in a several big web project (including a medical and telco infosystems) that motivated the development of Aranea.

CEO ( Uwyn ) Geert is the CEO of Uwyn, a small custom application development company with a strong focus on Web applications, open-source, Java and rich internet technologies. He is the founder of the RIFE project which provides a full-stack Java Web application framework for quickly building maintainable applications with sustainable developer productivity. He also started or contributed to projects like Bla-bla List, OpenLaszlo, Drone, Bamboo, Elephant, RelativeLayers, and Gentoo Linux. Geert has spoken at Java In Action and EuroOSCON. He is an invited speaker for two sessions at TheServerSide Java Symposium 2006 US and Europe, for one sessions at Fosdem 2006 and has presented RIFE at this year's JavaPolis during a 2.5h university session, quickie and BOF.

( Envoi Solutions LLC ) Dan Diephouse is an accomplished enterprise architect and open source developer who specializes in web services and service-oriented architecture. He is the founder of the popular XFire web service framework and a committer on several other open source projects, including the Apache ServiceMix, XmlSchema and Continuum projects. He is also the founder of Envoi Solutions http://envoisolutions.com/, which provides training, support and services for companies doing web services integration and SOA development.

Staff Engineer at BEA Systems' Business Interaction Division and a Developer Lead for Selenium ( BEA Systems ) Dan Fabulich is a Staff Engineer at BEA Systems' Business Interaction Division and a Developer Lead for Selenium. He has been writing and running multi-platform automated tests in Java and .NET since 2002, and has specialized in developing automated testing tools and infrastructure. He has a B.S. in Biomedical Engineering and Philosophy from Yale University.

Technology Evangelist ( Sun Microsystems ) Angela Caicedo is a Technology Evangelist at Sun Microsystems. Angela's expertise includes: Java ME, Java SE, Java EE, and the entire Sun Java Enterprise System. She loves spending time in new and cool technologies like: Game developments, 3D, bluetooth, smartdust (Sun' SPOTs), and others. She has also presented these topics at developer conferences around the world. Angela graduated from the University EAFIT of Medellin Colombia in 1998 with a B.S. in Computer Science. During 1996-1997 Angela was a visitor student at Center for Educational Computing Initiatives at MIT. Prior to joining Sun, Angela worked for three years as a software developer and researcher at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (EPFL), in Lausanne Switzerland, and participated in several European Projects. Angela has also done research on Intelligent Agents which is one of her specialties.

( Sun ) Simon Ritter is a Java Technology Evangelist at Sun Microsystems. Simon has been in the IT business since 1984 and holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Physics from Brunel University in the U.K. Originally working in the area of UNIX development for AT&T UNIX System Labs and then Novell, Simon moved to Sun in 1996. At this time he started working with Java technology and has spent time working both in Java technology development and consultancy. He now specialises in looking at emerging technologies including grid computing, RFID, robotics and wireless sensor networks. Simon and his performing LEGO robots have appeared before audiences worldwide.

Partner ( TellU AS ) Geir Melby is partner in tellU, a spin-off from Ericsson founded on the results of several years of research in Ericsson. He holds a master’s degree in Computer Science from Agder University College. Geir Melby was research manager in Ericsson, where he has been responsible for several research projects working on application development, modelling techniques and framework design. Recently has been working on service frameworks specifically targeting the convergence of the telecom and IT sector. He has also experiences from product development especially in the real time domain.
Partner ( TellU AS ) Knut Eilif Husa (knut.eilif.husa@tellu.no) is a partner in tellU, a spin-off from Ericsson founded on the results of several years of research in Ericsson. He holds a master’s degree in Computer Science from NTNU. Knut Eilif has 8 years of experience from Ericsson where he has been performing research on service frameworks specifically targeting the convergence of the telecom and IT sector. In Ericsson he has also been involved in development of mobile eCommerce solutions. Previously, he has been working in ABB Corporate Research with several internet related projects. Lately he has been engaged by enCap and has the technical responsibility for the enCap security solution.

Software Engineering Manager ( Sun Microsystems ) Richard Gregor is Software Engineering Manager at Sun Microsystems. Since November 2005, Richard has been leading the Sun Java Wireless Toolkit Team, focusing on JSR 248 reference implementation and the next version of the fabulous Sun Java Wireless Toolkit. Richard has been with Sun Microsystems for over 5 years, working also as NetBeans IDE developer in Prague Sun Development Center. In his current role, Richard is responsible for managing of toolkit implementation, innovation and promotion of mobile platforms.

Research Engineer Carlos Quiroz-Castro is a Research Engineer working at the Nokia Research Center in Helsinki Finland. He has worked in several mobile Java related projects and has published several documents and tutorials on the subject at the Forum Nokia website. In 2003 he presented at the JavaOne conference the BOF: “Implementing Multi-Player MIDP 2.0 Games Using Bluetooth”. He has been recently working in the Next Generation Mobile Java platform.

Senior Software Engineer ( Sun ) Brian Leonard works as a senior software engineer with Sun Microsystems. He's been working with application servers before there was a J2EE standard, helping develop applications as well as the servers that run them. Until most recently, Brian's been focused on helping large enterprises implement and deploy highly-available architectures. In his current role, Brian is an evangelist for the NetBeans open source IDE.

Marketing Manager ( Systek ) Bjørn Sloth works as a consultant and also as marketing manager in Systek. He holds a bachelor’s degree in Computer Science from University of Colorado and in economics from Norwegian School of Management. Bjørn has, since 1982, been involved in numerous development projects for Norwegian industry, the telecom sector and the bank/finance sector. He has been involved in mobile and mCommerce projects for the past 5 years and ”knows a lot about how the adoption of a mobile service can fail”. He has been the project manager for one of the pilot projects.
Partner ( TellU AS ) Knut Eilif Husa (knut.eilif.husa@tellu.no) is a partner in tellU, a spin-off from Ericsson founded on the results of several years of research in Ericsson. He holds a master’s degree in Computer Science from NTNU. Knut Eilif has 8 years of experience from Ericsson where he has been performing research on service frameworks specifically targeting the convergence of the telecom and IT sector. In Ericsson he has also been involved in development of mobile eCommerce solutions. Previously, he has been working in ABB Corporate Research with several internet related projects. Lately he has been engaged by enCap and has the technical responsibility for the enCap security solution.

Systemarkitekt ( Bouvet ) Øyvind Litlere. Arbeider ved Bouvet i Bergen. Prosjektleder for implementasjon av ny innbyggerportal I Bergen kommune. Har bakgrunn som utvikler, prosjektleder og systemarkitekt.
Sjefsarkitekt ( Ontopia ) Sjefsarkitekt hos Ontopia. Har vært hovedutvikler for Ontopias emnekartprodukter siden oppstarten i 2000, og har også bidratt i flere emnekartprosjekter. Har skrevet tre emnekartmotorer, og flere open source-produkter rundt XML. Utdannelse som grafisk ingeniør.

Technical architect ( Software-innovation ) I have been the solution and technical architect from the very start of the MyPage project. And I'm still working in the project defining, and designing new versions.

co-founder of InfoQ.com ( InfoQ.com ) Floyd Marinescu is co-founder of InfoQ.com and was also previously the creator of TheServerSide.com and TheServerSide Java Symposium conferences. Floyd is the author of the best seller "EJB Design Patterns" (2002, John Wiley and Sons). Floyd also publishes a blog on Enterprise Java topics at http://dynamicsemantics.blog-city.com/.
Chief-Architect ( InfoQ.com ) Alexandru Popescu is Chief-Architect of InfoQ.com. Alexandru is involved in many open source initiatives and bleeding-edge technologies (AOP, testing, web, etc.), being co-founder of the TestNG Framework and a committer on the WebWork and Magnolia projects. Alexandru formerly was one of three committers on the AspectWerkz project before it merged with AspectJ. Alexandru also publishes a blog on tech topics at http://themindstorms.blogspot.com/.

Arkitekt ( Accenture ANS ) Utdanning: Master of Science - Distributed Mulitmedia Systems Erfaring: Har jobbet 6 år i Accenture med hovedfokus på Java/J2EE platformen. 4+ års arkitekturerfaring på platformen. Har jobbet for Rikstrygdeverket i 2,5 år, her hovedsaklig som arkitekt for utviklingsarkitektur. Hovedintresser: - Utviklingsarkitektur - Integrasjonsakriktektur - Java/JEE Arkitektur
Arkitekt ( Rikstrygdeverket ) Utdanning: Høgskoleingeniør, videreutdanning Institutt for Informatikk, Universitetet i Oslo Erfaring: 8 års erfaring med utvikling og arkitektur. Jobbet 4 år som arkitekt i IT-Avdelingen i RTV som fagansvarlig for J2EE-plattformen. Arkitekt, utvikler og kvalitetssikrer på diverse prosjekter. Tidligere jobbet i CSC og Newmad Technologies. Hovedinteresser: - Enterprise Architecture - Development Architecture - Integrasjonsarkitektur - Storskala systemer.

Seniorkonsulent ( Webstep ) Seniorkonsulent i Webstep med hovedfokus på systemutvikling og arkitektur med Java som plattform. Spesielle interesseområder innen løsningsorienterte oppgaver i grensesnitt mellom teknologi og forretningsprosesser. Bred erfaring fra prosjekter innen offentlig og privat sektor. Har holdt foredrag om server-basert java i inn- og utland tidligere.

Work experience: 5 years of experience from Telenor Interests: Building stuff
( Accenture ANS ) Work experience: 5 years of experience as a technical consultant from Accenture Interests: RC Helicopters

Lead Software Architect at BBS ( BBS ) Johannes Brodwall is a veteran speaker at JavaZone. He currently works at BBS where he aims to improve the way the company develops software. He is one of Norway's most prominent advocates of test-driven development and other agile methods.
CTO and Architect ( Bekk ) Trond Arve Wasskog is an architect working at Bekk Consulting. He has been involved in Java and J2EE application development for more than ten years, focusing on agile software development, testing and quality. Currently he is the competency lead at Bekk Consulting, responsible for competency development and managing the Technology competency groups.

Lead Software Architect at BBS ( BBS ) Johannes Brodwall is a veteran speaker at JavaZone. He currently works at BBS where he aims to improve the way the company develops software. He is one of Norway's most prominent advocates of test-driven development and other agile methods.

Programmer, System Architect and Consultant ( Omegapoint AB ) Dan Bergh Johnsson, programmer, system architect and consultant at Omegapoint AB, Sweden. Since the time as "assisting teacher" at the computing science department at Uppsala University, Dan has propagated for "Code that Mean Something" (as opposed to just doing it). Nowadays, this is reflected as an interest for high-quality system development, with unit-testing, DDD and agile methods as some specialities. Dan is also a recurring speaker at conferences at national and international level, such as Colorado Software Summit and JavaZone (2002 and 2003).

Softwareutvikler ( BBS ) Eirik Torske har jobbet som utvikler hos Bankenes Betalingssentral (BBS) siden 2004. Han har hovedfag i informatikk fra UiO, og har jobbet i større og mindre Java-prosjekter siden 2000.

Manager ( Bekk Consulting AS ) Eivind Waaler is a Manager and Technology Group leader in Bekk Consulting AS. His main focus areas are Java and J2EE technology, and he is currently in charge of the BEKK Open Source Software (BOSS) initiative. Eivind has held presentations on the three last JavaZone conferences.
Consultant ( Bekk Consulting AS ) Christian Hauknes is a Senior Consultant for Bekk Consulting AS. He mainly works with Java and J2EE, with a special focus on testing and agile methods. He is currently the leader of Bekk Agile Movement.

( Simula Research Laboratory ) Magne Jørgensen received the Diplom Ingeneur degree in Wirtschaftswissenschaften from the University of Karlsruhe, Germany, in 1988 and the Dr. Scient. degree in Informatics from the University of Oslo, Norway in 1994. He has 10 years’ industry experience as a software developer, project leader and manager. He is now Professor in Software Engineering at the University of Oslo and a member of the software engineering research group of Simula Research Laboratory in Oslo, Norway. He has published many articles in international journals on software cost estimation. He has supported work on the improvement of software project estimation and has been responsible for estimation training in several software companies.
( Simula Research Laboratory ) Stein Grimstad received the MSc degree in Informatics from the University of Oslo, Norway in 1998. He has 7 years’ industry experience as software developer and solution architect. He is now a PhD-student in Software Engineering at the University of Oslo, and is a member of the software engineering research group of Simula Research Laboratory in Oslo, Norway. He also works part-time as an advisor at Objectnet. His research interests are software engineering and, in particular, software cost estimation.

Kevlin Henney is an independent consultant based in the UK. He specialises in programming languages, OO design, patterns, development process and software architecture, helping teams adopt techniques and improve their software development through mentoring, reviewing and training. He has been a columnist for various magazines and is currently a columnist for the Reg Developer channel of The Register.

Ken Schwaber co-developed the Agile process, Scrum. He is a founder of the Agile Alliance and Scrum Alliance, and signatory to the Agile Manifesto. Ken has been a software developer for over thirty years. He is an active advocate and evangelist for Agile processes.

Chief Scientist ( Objectnet ) Nils Christian Haugen is chief scientist at Objectnet and an agile developer and coach. He has been working with large distributed object-oriented applications for companies in various industries since 1998. Nils Christian has enjoyed working with XP/Agile teams at ThoughtWorks, and is an experienced speaker on topics in Java and Agile software development at national and international conferences. He holds an MEng degree in computer science from the Norwegian University of Science and Technology.
Assistant director ( Simula Research Laboratory ) Kjetil Moløkken-Østvold is an assistant director at Simula Research Laboratory in Norway. He received his MSc and PhD degrees in informatics from the University of Oslo, Norway, in 2002 and 2004, respectively. He has a bachelor degree in psychology from the University of Oslo. His main research interests are software estimation, group processes, management of public projects and software process improvement.

Writer and speaker ( Poppendieck.com ) Mary Poppendieck has been in the Information Technology industry for thirty years. She has managed solutions in software development, supply chain management, manufacturing operations, and new product development. She spearheaded the implementation of a Just-in-Time system in a video tape manufacturing plant, resulting in dramatic improvements in the plant's performance. Mary’s team leadership skills were honed in 3M, where new product development is a core competency. Her teams commercialized products with embedded software three times faster than normal, often partnering with small suppliers in the process. A popular writer and speaker, Mary’s classes apply lean principles to Software Development problems and offer a fresh perspective on software development processes. Her book Lean Software Development: An Agile Toolkit was awarded the Software Development Productivity Award in 2004. Abstract Beyond Agile Software Development: Becoming Lean Lean thinking has had a dramatic effect on industries from manufacturing to banking to hospitals. In software development, lean principles lead us inevitably to agile software development – and beyond. Lean is not just about iterative development, it is about transforming customer needs into deployed software rapidly, reliably, and repeatedly. Lean is not about slowing down and being careful, it’s about catching errors the moment they occur so that you can reliably go fast. And finally, lean is about taking a look at the amount of work you have piled up in lists and queues – with an eye to getting rid of the queues entirely. This presentation deals with aspects of lean that you might not have thought about while implementing agile software development practices. It will challenge development teams to think differently about the way they approach their work. Level The talk will be appropriate for any level. Outline Principles of Lean Just-in-Time – What does this mean in software development? Stop-the-Line – How does this actually work? Whole Team, Complete Product What is a value stream? What is a team? Go Fast Why Quality, Speed, and Low Cost go together How Queuing Theory works in software development.

Information Architect ( Corrections Corporation of America ) Dean Reynolds has built Enterprise-class systems for several large universities and companies in the U.S. He is currently working as Information Architect for the Corrections Corporation of America, an interesting industry with many unique challenges. A database specialist by trade, Dean has also spent many years as a developer. He is the successful author of Confessions of an IT Hitman at ITtoolbox.com where he discusses topics on BI, databases, and other IT related topics. To learn more about how Dean thinks, you can read his manifesto.

Rådgiver og CKO i Objectware ( Objectware ) Kristin Halvorsen. Rådgiver og CKO i Objectware. Jobber i grenseland mellom forretning og IT, spesielt innen virksomhetsportaler og knowledge management. Jobbet som konsulent/rådgiver i 11 år. Utdannet siv.ing data - informasjonssystemer.
Kreativ rådgiver ebusiness i Virtual Garden Screenplay ( Virtual Garden Screenplay ) Kreativ rådgiver ebusiness i Virtual Garden Screenplay. Utdannet fotograf fra University of Glocestershire. Har også studert Data- og multimedieteknikk Han har jobbet med design i interaktive medier siden 2000.

Technology Evangelist ( Sun Microsystems ) Angela Caicedo is a Technology Evangelist at Sun Microsystems. Angela's expertise includes: Java ME, Java SE, Java EE, and the entire Sun Java Enterprise System. She loves spending time in new and cool technologies like: Game developments, 3D, bluetooth, smartdust (Sun' SPOTs), and others. She has also presented these topics at developer conferences around the world. Angela graduated from the University EAFIT of Medellin Colombia in 1998 with a B.S. in Computer Science. During 1996-1997 Angela was a visitor student at Center for Educational Computing Initiatives at MIT. Prior to joining Sun, Angela worked for three years as a software developer and researcher at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (EPFL), in Lausanne Switzerland, and participated in several European Projects. Angela has also done research on Intelligent Agents which is one of her specialties.
( Sun ) Simon Ritter is a Java Technology Evangelist at Sun Microsystems. Simon has been in the IT business since 1984 and holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Physics from Brunel University in the U.K. Originally working in the area of UNIX development for AT&T UNIX System Labs and then Novell, Simon moved to Sun in 1996. At this time he started working with Java technology and has spent time working both in Java technology development and consultancy. He now specialises in looking at emerging technologies including grid computing, RFID, robotics and wireless sensor networks. Simon and his performing LEGO robots have appeared before audiences worldwide.
Director of Technology Outreach and Open Source Programs Office ( Sun Microsystems ) As Director of Technology Outreach and Sun's Open Source Programs Office, Matt Thompson leads Sun's technology evangelism efforts worldwide. His team focuses on educating and enabling the worldwide developer community to easily adopt Sun's emerging technologies like the core Java platform, the Sun Java Enterprise System, and Sun's secure mobility platform, as well as driving Sun's open source strategy for developers. Matt's 16 years of experience includes the software engineering of development environments, productivity tools, and object-oriented frameworks. Today, Matt spends most of his time focusing on delivering Sun's technology strategy to Sun's developers, partners and customers worldwide. Matt first started at Sun in 1988 and after several years "outside" at Taligent and General Magic he returned to Sun in 1997.

Chief Scientist ( Objectnet ) Nils Christian Haugen is chief scientist at Objectnet and an agile developer and coach. He has been working with large distributed object-oriented applications for companies in various industries since 1998. Nils Christian has enjoyed working with XP/Agile teams at ThoughtWorks, and is an experienced speaker on topics in Java and Agile software development at national and international conferences. He holds an MEng degree in computer science from the Norwegian University of Science and Technology.
CTO and Architect ( Bekk ) Trond Arve Wasskog is an architect working at Bekk Consulting. He has been involved in Java and J2EE application development for more than ten years, focusing on agile software development, testing and quality. Currently he is the competency lead at Bekk Consulting, responsible for competency development and managing the Technology competency groups.

( Simula Research Laboratory ) Stein Grimstad received the MSc degree in Informatics from the University of Oslo, Norway in 1998. He has 7 years’ industry experience as software developer and solution architect. He is now a PhD-student in Software Engineering at the University of Oslo, and is a member of the software engineering research group of Simula Research Laboratory in Oslo, Norway. He also works part-time as an advisor at Objectnet. His research interests are software engineering and, in particular, software cost estimation.
( Simula Research Laboratory ) Magne Jørgensen received the Diplom Ingeneur degree in Wirtschaftswissenschaften from the University of Karlsruhe, Germany, in 1988 and the Dr. Scient. degree in Informatics from the University of Oslo, Norway in 1994. He has 10 years’ industry experience as a software developer, project leader and manager. He is now Professor in Software Engineering at the University of Oslo and a member of the software engineering research group of Simula Research Laboratory in Oslo, Norway. He has published many articles in international journals on software cost estimation. He has supported work on the improvement of software project estimation and has been responsible for estimation training in several software companies.

Developer and Solutions Architect ( Objectware AS ) Mads Nissen currently works as a Solutions Architect for Objecware AS in Oslo. Starting out with java, he converted to C# and the .NET platform in 2001 and has been there since. Mads was a Micosoft Most Valuable Professional in 05/06, and has conducted several talks on major Microsoft focused events in Norway and abroad.

Chief System Architect ( WesternGeco )
Tor Neple is a Research Scientist at SINTEF ICT at the department of Collaborative and Trusted Systems. His research focus is currently on Model Driven Engineering including transformations and domain specific languages. During the last two years he has worked closely with WesternGeco in the IST project MODELWARE in applying and experimenting with MDD technology. He currently is taking part in the ongoing standardisation work on Model to Text Transformations at the Object Management Group.

SOA architect ( Oracle Consulting Norway ) Rune Nygård is a SOA architect at Oracle Consulting Norway. He has worked as an architect within J2EE development and distributed systems using enterprise application integration techniques for the last 8 years, and before that on client/server based systems. Special interests are technical architecture and effective software development. Rune has been a speaker at JavaZone earlier, and has presented on several national and international conferences.

Senior Consultant ( Bekk Consulting AS ) Stefan Magnus Landrø works as a senior consultant for Bekk Consulting, and has been working with Java and J2EE since 2001. He has a strong interest in open source software and in automating the java development process.

COO ( Bekk Consulting AS ) Reidar Sande is COO at Bekk Consulting and is a PMP-certified project manager. Reidar can document more than 10.000 hours project management experience from complex systems development and integration engagements, the last five years focusing on J2EE and agile software development. Through his participation in and management of a series of IT-engagements, Reidar has established a broad knowledge base within project management, specification and development/integration, in the role as developer, solution architect, test responsible and project manager.

Consultant ( Bekk Consulting AS ) Christian Schwarz is a consultant at Bekk Consulting AS, where he has worked with enterprise web applications and agile software development since 2004. Based on experience gained here, he co-founded the AutAT (now CubicTest) project, seeking to make web testing more accessible to all kinds of users. He is a member of BEKK's open source competency group, and has held demonstrations and talks about CubicTest at e.g. OOPSLA 2005 and Software 2006. He has a Master of Technology degree in Computer Science from NTNU, and has strong interest in testing and agile architectures.
Stein Kåre Skytteren is one of the key contributors and co-founder of AutAT which CubicTest builds upon and has held demonstration and talks about the project at e.g. OOPSLA 2005 and Software 2006. He has a keen interest in testing, agile development and open source with an emphasis on Java technology and enterprise solutions. Stein Kåre is working as a consultant at Steria in Oslo with a Master of Technology in Computer Science from NTNU and Bachelor of Business and Administration from TØH/HiST.

Konsulent ( Unified Consulting AS ) Klaus Stafto jobber som konsulent i Unified Consulting. Han har seks års prosjekterfaring med hovedsaklig java-teknologier. Klaus er Cand. Scient. fra NTNU med fagretning kunstig intelligens.

Daglig leder ( Esito ) Daglig leder i Esito AS med fokus på utvikling av verktøy som støtter modellbasert utvikling. Cand real fra Informatikk på UiO, 30 års erfaring innen programutvikling av basis programvare og verktøy. I de seinere år har han drevet mye med utvikling av java enterprise applikasjoner.

Java Middleware Evangelist ( Sun Microsystems ) Alexis Moussine-Pouchkine is a GlassFish evangelist. He has 10 years of customer-facing java experience and is now the two-way link between the core GlassFish developers and the broader community which involves presenting in various conferences around the world. Alexis is an editor of "The Aquarium" blog (http://blogs.sun.com/theaquarium) and a reviewer and translator of various Java and XML books. Alexis lives in Paris, France.

Software Engineer ( Sun ) Tor Norbye is a senior staff engineer at Sun Microsystems where he is working on Ruby support for NetBeans. Previously, he wrote the visual webform designer in Sun Java Studio Creator and worked on AJAX JSF components. He blogs regularly at http://blogs.sun.com/tor, and is a cohost of the Java Posse.
Evangineer ( Google ) Dick Wall has been programming computers since his first contact with one in 1983. He holds a B.Sc and M.Sc in Computer Science from the University of Kent, in the UK. He has worked for several technology companies in the intervening years, and is now a Developer Community Outreach engineer (or Evangineer) for Google, where he now works supporting developers in the community using Google products and APIs. He is also co-host of the Java Posse podcast - http://javaposse.com and the Google Developer Podcast - http://code.google.com/p/google-developer-podcast/
( Google ) Carl Quinn has been developing software since the late 1970's, and working in Java since the early days of 1995. He got into building developer libraries and tools early in his career, working at Borland on their C++ IDE and OWL, and then moving on to help start the JBuilder project. Later he joined the Rave project at Sun, which became the Java Studio Creator product. In addition to being a member of the Java Posse, he is currently at Google, focusing on Java developer tools and infrastructure.

Utvikler og arkitekt ( Arktekk ) Trygve Laugstøl jobber i Arktekk som utvikler, arkitekt og har mange års erfaring med Java-utvikling. Han har lang erfaring med utvikling og bruk av åpen kildekode som kjerneutvikler av Maven 2 og Continuum. Trygve har jobbet lenge med utvikling av plugins som støtter opp om smidig utvikling og som rådgiver innenfor disse områdene.

Java Technology Evangelist ( Sun Microsystems ) Simon Ritter is a Java Technology Evangelist at Sun Microsystems. Simon has been in the IT business since 1984 and holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Physics from Brunel University in the U.K. Originally working in the area of UNIX development for AT&T UNIX System Labs and then Novell, Simon moved to Sun in 1996. At this time he started working with Java technology and has spent time working both in Java technology development and consultancy. He now specialises in looking at emerging technologies including grid computing, RFID, robotics and wireless sensor networks. Simon and his performing LEGO robots have appeared before audiences worldwide.
Technology Evangelist ( Sun Microsystems ) Angela Caicedo is a Technology Evangelist at Sun Microsystems. Angela's expertise includes: Java ME, Java SE, Java EE, and the entire Sun Java Enterprise System. She loves spending time in new and cool technologies like: Game developments, 3D, bluetooth, smartdust (Sun' SPOTs), and others. She has also presented these topics at developer conferences around the world. Angela graduated from the University EAFIT of Medellin Colombia in 1998 with a B.S. in Computer Science. During 1996-1997 Angela was a visitor student at Center for Educational Computing Initiatives at MIT. Prior to joining Sun, Angela worked for three years as a software developer and researcher at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (EPFL), in Lausanne Switzerland, and participated in several European Projects. Angela has also done research on Intelligent Agents which is one of her specialties.

Technical Director and head of research ( IONA ) John Davies is a veteran speaker on global-scale enterprise architectures and high performance computing. John has well over 25 years in IT, mostly in investment banking, holding several global roles in the world's largest banks including Global Head of Architecture for Prime Brokerage at JP Morgan. In 2000 John co-founded a company called C24 specialising in complex integration for banking standards inclusing SWIFT, FpML and ISO-20022. C24 was sold to IONA in March 2007 where John is now Technical Director and head of research. In the early days of C24 John co-authored several enterprise Java books published by Wrox and has since authored several papers on TheServerSide and InfoQ on subjects including AMQP, Grid, HPC, XPath and JavaSpaces.
CTO and Co-founder ( MuleSource ) Prior to founding MuleSource Ross Mason was Chief Executive Officer of SymphonySoft Limited, an EU based company that provides services and support for open source integration projects. In 2003 Ross founded Mule, the leading Java-based integration platform and Enterprise Service Bus framework. Mule is being used by top-tier financial institutions and many other high profile enterprises in Telecommunications, Retail, Insurance and Government. Previously, Mason was Lead Architect for RaboBank and played a key role in developing one of the first large-scale ESB implementations in 2002. Mason holds a B.Sc. (Hons) in Computer Science from Bristol, UK.

CTO and Co-founder ( MuleSource ) Prior to founding MuleSource Ross Mason was Chief Executive Officer of SymphonySoft Limited, an EU based company that provides services and support for open source integration projects. In 2003 Ross founded Mule, the leading Java-based integration platform and Enterprise Service Bus framework. Mule is being used by top-tier financial institutions and many other high profile enterprises in Telecommunications, Retail, Insurance and Government. Previously, Mason was Lead Architect for RaboBank and played a key role in developing one of the first large-scale ESB implementations in 2002. Mason holds a B.Sc. (Hons) in Computer Science from Bristol, UK.

( Fast Search & Transfer ASA ) I work at Fast Search & Transfer ASA, where I have been employed since I completed my master in computer science at NUST (NTNU) in the complex computer systems group in 2005. Programming has been my hobby since the early 90s and I’m starting to get a grip on what it means. Recent experiences have taught me not to do multi-threaded programming. Unless really necessary. And necessary it is, so here I am doing it :)

Tooling developer ( IBM ) Holly is a tooling developer within the IBM Java Technology Centre. She develops garbage collection analysis tools, building on her experience working as a performance engineer within the garbage collection development team. Holly has been with IBM for five years. Before joining IBM she completed a doctorate in quantum computation at the University of Oxford.

Software Engineer ( Sun ) Tor Norbye is a senior staff engineer at Sun Microsystems where he is working on Ruby support for NetBeans. Previously, he wrote the visual webform designer in Sun Java Studio Creator and worked on AJAX JSF components. He blogs regularly at http://blogs.sun.com/tor, and is a cohost of the Java Posse.

Senior Developer ( Trolltech ASA ) Education: Cand. Scient. from the University of Oslo, specializing in Scientific Computing and Visualization. Current employment: Gunnar Sletta is a senior developer at Trolltech ASA in Oslo, Norway. He has worked for the company for almost 5 years and has worked in a number of areas. His initial work was on Qt's scripting support, an ECMAScript based interpreter based on the KDE project KJS. After that he was a major player in the design and implementation of Qt's 2D graphics subsystem. Recently he has been the lead developer on the Qt Jambi project. Gunnar Sletta is an experienced presenter and has held presentations on multiple occasions for larger audiences. Java background: In addition to his experience from leading the Qt Jambi development, he worked as a professional java developer for several years.

Konsulent ( Bouvet ) Currently works as a consultant for Bouvet AS with Java experience since 1999. Primary fields of interests are systems integration and Web development. A board member for the Norwegian Java User Group (javaBin), author of integration related articles and a presenter.

( Sun Microsystems ) Gregg Sporar has been a software developer for over twenty years, working on projects ranging from control software for a burglar alarm to 3D graphical user interfaces. He has been using Java since 1998 and his interests include user interfaces, development tools, and performance profiling. He works for Sun Microsystems as a Technical Evangelist on the NetBeans project.  He has done presentations at JavaOne, JavaZone, Sun Tech Days, and at Java User Group meetings.
( Sun Microsystems ) Jaroslav Bachorik has been in software development since 1998 and participating on various projects ranging from Business Intelligence and reporting through Document Management System implementations to enterprise Java applications. He is interested in Object Oriented design, design patterns, and their application in extreme programming (XP) environments. He joined the NetBeans Profiler team in early 2006 and is responsible mainly for Java EE related features. He did a technical demo of the NetBeans Profiler at NetBeans Day Prague 2006.
( Sun Microsystems ) Jiri Sedlacek joined the NetBeans Profiler project as a developer in 2004 after finishing his university studies. He primarily works on integrating the tools provided by the NetBeans Profiler into the NetBeans IDE. He is responsible for NetBeans Profiler user interface and usability design decisions. His presentation experience includes an in-depth session on the NetBeans Profiler at NetBeans Day Prague in 2006.

Senior Consultant ( Capgemini Norway ) Nils Hofseth Andersen is a Senior Consultant in Capgemini Norway, with 8 years experience working as Java developer and solution architect, mainly within the Oil & Gas industry.

Senior Software Engineer ( IBS JavaSolutions ) Rikard Thulin is a Senior Software Engineer at IBS JavaSolutions. Rikard is one of the lead persons for the Java User Group in Gotenburg, JavaFroum. In a previous life, Rikard worked as a Java Architect at Sun Microsystems. Rikard holds a M.S. in Software Engineering. Previous presentations: JavaZone 2006, http://www2.java.no/web/show.do?page=92&articleid=4559 JavaForum in Stockholm and Gothenburg, several talks the last couple of years. More information about Javaforum can be found here: http:///javaforum.se Sun Engineering Conference 2005, Santa Clara, USA
Consultant ( IBS JavaSolutions ) Ferid Sabanovic is a consultant at IBS JavaSolutions. His interests include J2EE and other similar object oriented technologies like .NET. Ferid is actively involved in the Swedish Java User Group Javaforum. Ferid holds a B.Sc degree in Informatics

VP of Product Management ( Kaazing Corporation ) Jonas Jacobi recently worked as VP of Product Management responsible for the product management and marketing strategy for Brane Corporation, a startup company in Silicon Valley. A native of Sweden, Jonas has worked in the software industry for more than fifteen years. Prior to his appointment as vice president for Brane, he worked 8 years for Oracle as a Java EE and open source Evangelist, and product manager responsible for the product management of JavaServer Faces, Oracle ADF Faces, and Oracle ADF Faces Rich Client in the Oracle JDeveloper team. He is a popular speaker at international conferences and has written numerous articles for leading IT magazines such as Java Developer's Journal, JavaPro, AjaxWorld, and Oracle Magazine. Jonas is co-author of the recently published book Pro JSF and Ajax: Building Rich Internet Components, (Apress). As co-founder of Kaazing Corporation, Jonas sets the company's product management and business strategy and oversees all aspects of Kaazing's operations and missions to become the world-wide leader in real-time software.
( Kaazing Corporation ) John Fallows is a pioneer in the field of rich and highly interactive user interfaces and co-founder of Kaazing Corporation. He recently worked as Architect at Brane Corporation, a startup company based in Redwood City, California. Originally from Norther Ireland, John graduated from Cambridge University in the United Kingdom and has worked in the software industry for more than ten years. Prior to joining Brane, John was a Consulting Member of Technical Staff for Server Technologies at Oracle Corporation. During his last 5 years at Oracle, John focused on designing, developing, and evolving Oracle ADF Faces to fully integrate Ajax technologies. John is a popular speaker at international conferences and has written numerous articles for leading IT magazines such as Java Developer's Journal, AjaxWorld Magazine, and JavaMagazine (DE). John is co-author of the recently published book Pro JSF and Ajax: Building Rich Internet Components, (Apress). John formulates Kaazing Corporation's vision of creating the most simplest realtime framework based on the Java standard. He defines the architecture of the Kaazing product suite and oversees its development..

Mr. Ivanov has over 15 years of experience in software development and over 7 years of developing grid computing and distributed middleware, a vision and pragmatic view of where development technology is going, and high quality standards in software engineering. Prior the founding of the GridGain project Mr. Ivanov built and led R&D organization at Fitech Laboratories, Inc. that developed innovative grid computing and distributed caching middleware products. Back in 1996, Mr. Ivanov was one of the pioneers in using Java technology for server side middleware development while working at T-Systems GmbH, one of the largest European System Integrator. Mr. Ivanov has held various positions architecting and leading software product development for start-up companies and working with well-established companies such as Adaptec, Visa and BEA Systems. Mr. Ivanov is an active member of Java middleware community and is a contributor to Java specifications as a member of JSR-107. Mr. Ivanov holds a Master's degree in Electro Mechanics from Baltic State Technical University, Saint Petersburg, Russia.

Java Technology Evangelist ( Sun Microsystems ) Simon Ritter is a Java Technology Evangelist at Sun Microsystems. Simon has been in the IT business since 1984 and holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Physics from Brunel University in the U.K. Originally working in the area of UNIX development for AT&T UNIX System Labs and then Novell, Simon moved to Sun in 1996. At this time he started working with Java technology and has spent time working both in Java technology development and consultancy. He now specialises in looking at emerging technologies including grid computing, RFID, robotics and wireless sensor networks. Simon and his performing LEGO robots have appeared before audiences worldwide.

( Morningside Light Ltd ) Maurice Naftalin is Technical Director at Morningside Light Ltd, a software consultancy in the UK. As an academic, he published or presented fifteen papers in the area of formal specification and refinement of programs. Amongst his commercial roles he has most recently served as an architect and mentor at NSB Retail Systems plc, and as the leader of the client development team of a major UK government social service system. He has extensive experience both as a university teacher and as a commercial trainer in Java and Object- Oriented technologies, for Sun and Learning Tree amongst others. He is co-author of 'Java Generics and Collections' (O'Reilly, 2006)

( ErgoGroup ) Markus Krüger works as a systems consulent developing enterprise systems in Java at ErgoGroup AS, one of the largest Norwegian software companies offering operations, solutions and consultancy services. He is part of the company's Java technology group. Markus has 8 years experience in the software industry, working with various technologies and environments, including J2EE/JEE the last 5 years. Other experiences includes work on search engine technology at FAST, browser video plugins at GridMedia, and e-mail security and notary services at eNotarius. He has previously held talks, both internally and to open audiences, on various subjects such as CVS, Hibernate, and performance testing. The current presentation is based on internal talks and workshops at ErgoGroup.

Alexandru is involved in many open source initiatives and bleeding-edge technologies (AOP, testing, web, etc.), being co-founder of the TestNG Framework and a committer on the Groovy, WebWork and Magnolia projects. Alexandru formerly was one of three committers on the AspectWerkz project before it merged with AspectJ. Alexandru is also the architect and co-founder of InfoQ.com.

Senior Staff Engineer ( Sun Microsystems ) Craig R. McClanahan is the Web 2.0 Architect for Java Tools at Sun Microsystems, responsible for directing the development of tooling support for next generation web technologies. Previously, he was architect for Sun Java Studio Creator and the NetBeans Visual Web Pack, focused on visual development using JavaServer Faces components. Craig was also co-specification lead of the JavaServer Faces 1.0 specification (JSR-127), and the original creator of the Apache Struts and Apache Shale web application frameworks.

Solution Architect ( Sun ) Jason Baragry is a Solution Architect with Sun Microsystems in Norway. He has a PhD in software engineering and 15 years of software architecture experience in pure research, applied research, and commercial projects.

Senior software engineer ( FamilySearch.org ) Ryan Heaton is a senior software engineer for FamilySearch.org.  Ryan specializes in the design and development of Web services, particularly for the Java platform.  He actively contributes to the effort of making Web services easy to develop and publish while maintaining an acceptable level of interoperability.  As part of his contribution to this end, Ryan engineered Enunciate, a Web service deployment framework.  Ryan is the father of four boys and currently resides in Salt Lake City.

CTO ( Objectnet ) Nils Christian Haugen is the CTO of Objectnet and an agile developer and coach. He has been working with large distributed object-oriented applications for companies in various industries since 1998. Nils Christian has enjoyed working with XP/Agile teams at ThoughtWorks, and is an experienced speaker on topics in Java and Agile software development at national and international conferences. He holds an MSc degree in computer science from the Norwegian University of Science and Technology.

( Sun Microsystems ) I am a member of the Swing team in Sun microsystems I've been working with graphical interfaces more than 5 years Currently I am maintaining and improving the Swing library Please check out my blog: http://weblogs.java.net/blog/alexfromsun/ and the SwingHelper project https://swinghelper.dev.java.net/

Vice President of Development in Oracle's Fusion Middleware group ( Oracle ) Cameron Purdy is a Vice President of Development in Oracle's Fusion Middleware group. He was the founder, president and CEO of Tangosol and has over ten years of experience with Java and Java-related technology. Since 2000, his leadership, vision, and commitment to exceptional product quality and customer satisfaction have made Tangosol Coherence, now Oracle Coherence, the market leading in-memory caching and data grid solution to companies building and running mission critical Enterprise Java and .NET applications. Tangosol was acquired by Oracle in April 2007. As a software visionary and industry leader, Mr. Purdy is a frequent presenter at industry conferences and has received a number of awards in recognition of his contribution to the Java community. He regularly participates in industry standards development and is the specification lead for JSR 107 (jCache).

( Interface 21 ) Juergen has been the most active Spring developer since the open source project began from Rod's Interface21 framework back in February 2003. Juergen and Rod together continue to provide the direction for Spring. Juergen has earned great respect in the Spring and J2EE communities for his energy, the quality of his code, his incredible attention to detail, and his huge contribution in Spring forums and mailing lists. Juergen is an experienced consultant, with outstanding expertise in web applications, transaction management, O/R mapping technologies, and lightweight remoting. He has specialized in J2EE since early 2000, having held technology leader positions in various projects ranging from enterprise application integration to web-based data visualization.

Enterprise architect ( Envois Solutions ) Mr. Diephouse is an accomplished enterprise architect and open source developer who specializes in web services and service-oriented architecture. He is a co-founder of the Apache CXF services framework, founder of XFire, and a committer on several other open source projects, including Apache ServiceMix, Apache XmlSchema, and Jettison. He is also the founder of Envoi Solutions which is dedicated to providing support, training, and consulting around SOA and web services.

Architect ( Oracle ) Mike Keith was the co-specification lead for EJB 3.0 (JSR 220) and a member of the Java EE 5 expert group (JSR 244). He co-authored the premier JPA reference book called Pro EJB 3: Java Persistence API and has over 15 years of teaching, research and development experience in object-oriented and distributed systems, specializing in object persistence. He is currently a Java and persistence architect for Oracle and is a popular speaker at numerous conferences and events around the world.

Consultant ( Accenture ) Morten er Consultant i Accenture og har jobbet med Java-/JEE-utvikling i 3 år, med spesialisering på EJB og persisteringsteknologier. Han er nå en del av applikasjonsarkitekturteamet på NAVs pensjonsprosjekt. Han har tidligere jobbet på prosjekter innen for bank og telekom.

Director of Systems Infrastructure ( LeapFrog ) Eugene is the Director of Systems Infrastructure for LeapFrog Enterprises, the largest educational toy company in the United States. In 2006 he led the first-time adoption of Linux and other open-source technologies at Wal-Mart Stores Information Systems Division as chief liaison between Walmart.com Global and the ISD technology council. Eugene has contributed to Java. Linux, and OS X open-source projects and has architected main line of business applications, embedded platforms, and real-time systems for the largest companies in the world, including Wal-Mart, Bank One/Chase, National Oilwell Varco, Bank of America, Credit Suisse, Nortel Networks, Sun Microsystems, IBM, Univex/Celanese, Nexis/Lexis, and others. He's the author of over 50 feature articles and editorials about technology and computer programming topics for such publications as Software Guru, Computerworld, Informatique!, EE Times, Byte, PC/Tips, and OMNI, and he's a contributing editor to TheServerSide.com, the leading Java technology community and periodical worldwide. He's currently working on a book about the Mule ESB and on his second novel. Eugene may be reached on freenode IRC (##java, #awk, #esb, #security) under the /nick pr3d4t0r.

Senior consultant ( Interface 21 ) Arjen Poutsma is a senior consultant at Interface21 with more than ten years' experience in commercial software environments. During this time he has worked with both J2EE and Microsoft .NET. Three years ago, Arjen started to specialise in Web Services and Service Oriented Architectures. During this period, he has worked for some of the largest organizations in the world helping them better understand enterprise Java and how SOAs fit into their organizations. In part from his experiences with these organizations, Arjen founded the open source Spring Web Services project and continues to lead the technical direction and development as the project lead for Spring Web Services. This project aims at facilitating development of document-driven web services. Arjen has also contributed to various other open source projects, including XFire, NEO and others. He is a regular speaker at Java and SOA conferences, including JavaPolis, The Spring Experience, JavaZone, W-JAX, and many others.

Konsulent ( Zenior AS ) Bjørn Bjerkeli currently works as a Senior Consultant in Zenior AS, a Norwegian consulting company. Bjørn has been implementing large-scale distributed systems in Java for insurance companies, banks and major European telecom providers since 1997. He has been working for companies like Nokia and Sybase among others. Although Bjørn often spends much of his time in design and mentoring, he enjoys it when he is engaged in serious coding and development. Bjørn has been member of the program committee for the last three years and is a board member of javaBin. Bjørn writes about his experiences at: Devperspective
Senior consultant ( Zenior AS ) Ole Andre Ranvik is a senior consultant working for Zenior AS. He has specialized in JEE development and is a Sun certified web component developer. He has previously been doing sessions at JavaZone on portlets and how to avoid plumbing for business-enriched remote clients.

Consultant ( Interface21 ) I'm currently employed as a consultant at Interface21 where I am involved mainly with product development (Spring/OSGi, Spring JPA, Java Config and Spring Modules). I'm mainly interested in data access and AOP.

consultant ( Object Mentor ) Michael Feathers is a consultant with Object Mentor. He balances his time between working with, training and coaching various teams around the world. Prior to joining Object Mentor, Michael designed a proprietary programming language and wrote a compiler for it, he also designed a large multi-platform class library and a framework for instrumentation control. Publically, Michael developed CppUnit, the initial port of JUnit to C++, and FitCpp, a C++ port of the FIT integrated-test framework. Michael is also the author of the book 'Working Effectively with Legacy Code' (Prentice Hall 2004).

( Bekk Consulting ) Lars Lunde work at Bekk Consulting and is a member of the security competency group there. He has a special focus on security implementations in Java.
( Bekk Consulting ) Anders Østen work at Bekk Consulting and is a member of the security competency group there. He has a special focus on security implementations in Java.

Senior architect ( Sun Microsystems ) Linda DeMichiel is a senior architect in the Java EE Platform group at Sun Microsystems and specification lead for Java Persistence 2.0. As the former specification lead of Enterprise JavaBeans 3.0 she was responsible for driving the radical simplification of the EJB programming model, and was recognized as the 2006 Java Community Process Outstanding Spec Lead for Java SE/EE for her leadership in this work. Linda has over 20 years of experience in the areas of databases, object persistence, and distributed computing. Before assuming responsibility for EJB, she led the team that implemented Sun's first object/relational persistence product, and worked earlier at IBM on object/relational extensions to both DB2 and the SQL99 standard. She holds a Ph.D. in Computer Science from Stanford University.

( Interface 21 ) Juergen has been the most active Spring developer since the open source project began from Rod's Interface21 framework back in February 2003. Juergen and Rod together continue to provide the direction for Spring. Juergen has earned great respect in the Spring and J2EE communities for his energy, the quality of his code, his incredible attention to detail, and his huge contribution in Spring forums and mailing lists. Juergen is an experienced consultant, with outstanding expertise in web applications, transaction management, O/R mapping technologies, and lightweight remoting. He has specialized in J2EE since early 2000, having held technology leader positions in various projects ranging from enterprise application integration to web-based data visualization.
Senior consultant ( Interface 21 ) Arjen Poutsma is a senior consultant at Interface21 with more than ten years' experience in commercial software environments. During this time he has worked with both J2EE and Microsoft .NET. Three years ago, Arjen started to specialise in Web Services and Service Oriented Architectures. During this period, he has worked for some of the largest organizations in the world helping them better understand enterprise Java and how SOAs fit into their organizations. In part from his experiences with these organizations, Arjen founded the open source Spring Web Services project and continues to lead the technical direction and development as the project lead for Spring Web Services. This project aims at facilitating development of document-driven web services. Arjen has also contributed to various other open source projects, including XFire, NEO and others. He is a regular speaker at Java and SOA conferences, including JavaPolis, The Spring Experience, JavaZone, W-JAX, and many others.

Senior systems consultant ( Basefarm AS ) - M.Sc. microelectroncs, University of Oslo - Developer, architect and project manager with background as a consultant and from the communications industry.

( Terracotta ) Jonas is working at Terracotta Inc. with a focus on strategy, product development & architecture and technical evangelism. If Prior to Terracotta, Jonas was a senior software engineer at the JRockit team at BEA Systems, where he was working on runtime tools, JVM support for AOP and technology evangelism. He is a committer to Terracotta, the founder of the AspectWerkz AOP framework and has been a committer to the Eclipse AspectJ 5 project and various other Open Source projects. Jonas is a frequent speaker on AOP, JVM-level clustering and other emerging technologies (JavaOne, TSSJS, TSE, JAOO, eWorld, Javapolis, SpringOne, AOSD conferences etc.). For more info, see his blog: http://jonasboner.com

Sr. Director, Worldwide Technical Communications ( GigaSpaces ) As Sr. Director, Worldwide Technical Communications with GigaSpaces Technologies Inc, Owen translates the new architectural concepts and technical capabilities of space-based solutions into accessible formats so that technologists can adapt them rapidly into their environments and gain their maximum benefit. Owens' areas of expertise include J2EE design patterns and performance tuning of J2EE applications. Prior to GigaSpaces, Owen worked as Principal J2EE Product Specialist with Identify Software. Before that Owen acted as Senior Enterprise Architect with The Middleware Company where he specialized in B2B, EJB and J2EE training and consulting with a special emphasis on webMethods B2B server and, BEA WebLogic Servers. Owen has over the years delivered architecture consulting, mentoring and training to dozens of companies and advised them on how to best architect new applications ranging from e-commerce to stock-trading. Many of his engagements involved developing application prototypes on-site. Prior to The Middleware-Company, Owen was Senior Consultant and Partner in The New Customware Company, where his duties mirrored almost exactly those he executed with the Middleware Company. Prior to CustomWare, Owen was Senior Consultant and Instructor in the Professional Services organization at Inprise (Borland) (an EJB/J2EE & CORBA vendor), where he provided consulting and mentoring to customers in not only building large applications with EJB/J2EE and CORBA, but also specifically on the instrumentation, monitoring and management of applications developed using these technologies. Publications Textual Articulations: active blog located here: http:// jroller.com/page/owentaylor Iterative Development: The Use of J2EE Best Practices: prepared for Precise Software - later to become Symantec Benefits and Market Placement of the Lutris Application Server -- Co-authored with Salil Deshpande

Senior Konsulent ( Objectware ) Bård har vært hangaround i javaBin siden 1999. Han begynte å jobbe med Java i 1998, og har siden jobbet med integrasjon mellom Java, Stormaskin og Domino. Bård har jobbet med saksbehandlingsystemer, hovedsaklig i distribuerte finanssystemer de siste 8 årene. Objectware er hans nye arbeidsplass, der han spesiellt er aktiv innen OW sin EA/SOA faggruppe. Bård kommer til å være med å holde en rekke Spring kurs det neste året. Jobber nå mest med Spring og EA/SOA praksis. Bård trives veldig godt som mentor for "ferske" Java programmere. Bård er en av ildskjelen bak RFID@Conference RFIDConferenceTools
Kjartan is working as a senior consultant at Objectware AS and has about 6 years of programming experience primarily working with J2EE. He has lately been focusing on Service Oriented Architecture and services in specific.

Simon is currently a member of the IBM Open Source SOA project team working with the open source Apache and PHP communities to build Java, C++ and PHP implementations of the Service Component Architecture (SCA) and Service Data Object (SDO) specifications. Prior to this role Simon was working in the distributed computing space building service oriented solutions for customers with a particular interest in grid computing and virtualization.

Kirk is a principle consultant for Kodewerk where he has focused on performance tuning. Kirk has been involved with object technologies and performance for almost 20 years. In addition to being a co-author of ANT Developers Handbook, he contributes to www.javaperformancetuning.com and is an editor for TSS www.theserverside.com.

Enterprise Architect ( Storebrand ) Anders Norås works as an enterprise architect for Storebrand. He hasmore than 10 years experience developing business application usinga wide variety of technologies. Anders is an experienced speaker whohas talked at numerous user group meetings and industryconferences.

Kevlin Henney is an independent consultant based in the UK. He specialises in programming languages, OO design, patterns, development process and software architecture, helping teams adopt techniques and improve their software development through training, mentoring and reviewing and training. He has been a columnist for various magazines and is currently a columnist for the Reg Developer channel of The Register. He is also coauthor of two recent volumes in the Pattern-Oriented Software Architecture series.

Software architect ( Savoir Technologies ) Jeff has over 18 years of software architecture, team lead, and development experience in multiple industries. He is a frequent speaker at such events as TheServerSide Symposium, JavaZone, Java In Action, and numerous Java User Groups on topics pertaining to Enterprise Service Bus (ESBs), Service Oriented Architectures (SOA), and application servers. Jeff is an active committer and Project Management Committee (PMC) member for Apache Geronimo, a committer on OpenTerracotta, OpenEJB, ServiceMix, and Mojo (Maven plugins). He is the author of Enterprise Java Servlets (Addison Wesley Longman, 2001), the co - author of Professional Apache Geronimo (2006, Wiley), and Professional Tomcat (2007, Wiley). Jeff also serves as a member of the Java Community Process (JCP) expert group for JSR-244 (Java Platform, Enterprise Edition 5 (Java EE 5) Specification) as a representative of the Apache Software Foundation. Jeff is an open source evangelist and has successfully brought open source development efforts, initiatives, and success stories into a number of Global 2000 companies, saving these organizations millions in licensing costs.

Software engineer and Java EE specialist ( 101 Solutions ) It is in 1987 in Munich, Germany that Alexandre Snaps discovers his natural ability for computer languages and starts their studies and gets involved in different Open Source projects. In 1999, he plunges into web development and three years later, he starts his own business, 101 Solutions (formely known as DOG7), focused on enterprise integration. He is developing web-applications for over ten years and using Java for more than seven years.

Senior developer ( Arktekk ) Kristoffer Moum is a senior developer with more than six years of development with enterprise Java. He likes agile principles and currently works as a Scrum master in a large enterprise project. Also, Kristoffer has done mentoring and architecture review as well as courses and various presentations.

Software Architect ( BBS ) Johannes Brodwall is lead software architect in BBS. He has been working with Java in enterprise environments for a number of years and is a veteran speaker at JavaZone. At BBS, he espouses simple applications with focus on domain-objects and a set of infrastructure components which are light-weight enough to be within the grasp of mere mortals. He has written two (soon to be three) articles describing elements of this architecture for Java.net ( http://today.java.net/pub/a/today/2005/10/11/testing-hibernate-mapping.html, http://today.java.net/pub/a/today/2006/07/13/lazy-loading-is-easy.html) and on his blog (http://brodwall.com/johannes/blog/ )

Software architect ( Atos Origin ) Tijs Rademakers is a software architect with over 6 years of experience in designing and developing Java and J(2)EE applications. In the last years he has designed and implemented large process and application integration solutions, primarly focussed on open standards. He has extensive product knowledge of open source as well as commercial integration solutions including WebSphere Process Server, WebSphere Message Broker, Mule and Synapse. Tijs is an active member of the Apache Synapse project.
Software Architect ( Atos Origin ) Jos Dirksen has been working with Java and J2EE applications for more then 6 years as a software architect. The last couple of years his focus has been open source, security and quality. He has worked a lot with the various open source and commercial integration solutions, mostly in the government and the healthcare areas. Jos has a lot of experience working with mule, synapse and Axis2 in commercial projects and has also completed projects based on the integration tooling from IBM. Jos regulary gives presentation on open source, mule and other related topics.

Elliotte is originally from New Orleans to which he returns periodically in search of a decent bowl of gumbo. However, he currently resides in the Prospect Heights neighborhood of Brooklyn with his wife Beth, dog Shayna, and cats Charm (named after the quark) and Marjorie (named after his mother-in-law). He's an adjunct professor of computer science at Polytechnic University where he teaches Java, XML, and object oriented programming. His books include Java I/O, Java Network Programming, the XML Bible, and XML in a Nutshell. His next book will be Refactoring HTMl from Addison-Wesley.

Consultant ( Ciber ) Mario is currently working with Java development and Integration at CIBER Norway, an acknowledged consulting company, delivering mission critical solutions with strong focus on Java, and related technologies. He holds a Master of Computer Science from Norwegian University of Science and Technology. Mario's interests are integration, Web Services and SOA using the Java platform. 
Developer ( Tarantell ) Tor Arne is java developer at Tarantell, a leading company in user friendly web systems. He has a Master in Computational Science, and has worked for IBM Netherland Center for Advanced Studies, where he did research on grid and semantic web services, which has been published on conferences. His main experience and interest is in the field enterprise architectures, integration and web systems.   

co-founder of Ajaxian.com Ben is a frequent technical speaker, occasional consultant, and author of several Java-related books. He is a co-founder of Ajaxian.com, was recently Chief Technical Officer for Amirsys, and is presently a consultant specializing in enterprise architecture and Swing/Ajax development. Ben wrote his first computer program when he was six years old, started his first business at ten, and entered the IT workforce just after turning twelve. For the past few years, he's been professionally coding in Java. Ben presides over the Utah Java User's Group, is active in the Java Community Process, and tinkers on various open-source projects from time to time. He delivered over eighty technical presentations in 2004 at venues including JavaOne, O'Reilly Open Source Conference (OSCON), and the No Fluff Just Stuff Java Symposiums.
co-founder ( Ajaxian.com ) Dion is the co-founder of Ajaxian.com, the leading Ajax community, and "Audible Ajax" the popular podcast. He is a columnist on Enterprise Java topics at openxource.com, onjava.com and of course his blog at almaer.com/blog. He enjoys writing, and speaking at events such as JavaOne, JavaPolis, TheServerSide Java Symposium, and the No Fluff Just Stuff symposium tour. He also participates on JCP expert groups, and the open source community as a whole.

Consultant ( Raibledesigns ) Matt Raible resides in Denver, Colorado, where he runs Raible Designs, a consultancy that specializes in open source Java frameworks and Ajax development. Matt has been surrounded by computers for most of his life, even though he grew up without electricity in the backwoods of Montana. Matt is an author (Spring Live, Pro JSP), active Java open-source contributor, and blogger on raibledesigns.com. He is the founder of AppFuse, a project which allows you to get started quickly with Java frameworks, as well as a committer on the Apache Roller project.

CTO of Technology Evangelism at Sun Microsystems Raghavan "Rags" Srinivas is the CTO of Technology Evangelism at Sun Microsystems looking at new technology directions and trends. His general focus area is in distributed systems, with a specialization in interoperability, mobility and security. He has spoken on a variety of technical topics at conferences around the world and teaches graduate classes in the evening. He publishes a standards column and has represented Sun at a number of standards bodies. He also serves in the organizing committee for several industry-wide technical conferences. Rags brings with him about 20 years of software development and about 7 years of technology evangelism experience. He worked for Digital Equipment Corporation before joining Sun. He has worked on several technology areas, including internals of VMS, Unix and NT. He has evangelized a number of technology areas including the early releases of Java, Java EE, Java and XML, Java ME, AJAX and Web 2.0 and so on. Rags holds a Masters degree in Computer Science from the Center of Advanced Computer Studies at the University of Louisiana at Lafayette. He enjoys running, hiking and eating, especially spicy food.

Chief Technical Officer ( Ezmo ) Work three years at Razorfish before joining Bekk Consulting As for 5 years as an Interface Developer working with webapplication in Java and .Net. Joined Fast Search & Transfer in 2006 and moved on to Ezmo in 2007. Helped Ezmo move from an old style HTML/AJAX based solution to a Adobe Flex based solution in 2007.
Senior Consultant ( Adobe Consulting ) Worked with Perl and Java development for 3 years before joining Bekk Consulting in 2003 as an Interface and Java developer. Started with Flex development in 2005, and joined Adobe Consulting in April 2007

( BEKK ) Eivind Waaler har 8 års erfaring med utvikling og testing av Java og J2EE applikasjoner, hovedsaklig med et web-relatert fokus. Han har erfaring med de fleste største Java-baserte web-rammeverkene som brukes, og har de siste 3-4 årene vært en aktiv bruker av WebWork (nå Struts2). Eivind jobber til daglig som faggruppeleder og systemutvikler/arkitekt i BEKK, og har holdt foredrag på JavaZone de 4 siste årene.

Stephan is the founder and chairman of the Belgian Java User Group since 1996 and founder of JavaPolis in 2002. He has been using Java since its early releases in 1995 with experience of developing and implementing real world Java solutions in the finance and manufacturing industries. He also founder and managing director of JCS Int. a Sun authorized Java Center with an exclusive focus on J2ME, J2SE and J2EE since 1997. JCS is also the very first Belgian Java company to speak at JavaOne 2003. He was selected by BEA Systems as the first European (independant) BEA Technical Director. He has also been recognized by the Server Side as one of the 54 Who is Who in Enterprise Java 2004. Sun has recognized in 2005 his efforts for the Java Community and has engaged me in the Java Champion project. He has spoken at numerous Java and JUG conferences including Java '98 (UK), JAOO '99 (Denmark), JavaDays 2000 (Norway), TMAB (Belgium), JavaPolis 2002-04-05, JavaOne 2003, SpringOne 2006, SAI, IT Works etc.

( Jetbrains ) Mike Aizatsky is an accomplished speaker and advanced developer with nine years of Java Development experience to draw from. In his presentations, he has developed a knack for expressing challenging concepts in simple ways, so that his audiences walk away with new knowledge and a lot of ideas on how to apply it. Aizatsky received his Masters Degree with Honors in Mathematics in 2000, and now leads the Web and Enterprise Development Department of the IntelliJ IDEA project at JetBrains. He is a certified SCRUM master, and when he's not in front of a computer screen, enjoys playing jazz piano, hiking, and slalom rollerskating.

Xavier Hanin is an independent software architect, developer and teacher based in Bordeaux, a beautiful city of France well known for its famous red wines. Over the years, Xavier has worked on a large spectrum of projects, mostly in Java, both private and open source. He is the creator of Ivy, currently incubating at the ASF, and Xooctory, a continuous integration server using Apache Wicket as web framework. He is also actively involved in the Wicket community, contributing to wicketstuff-push, databinder and wicketstuff-jquery.

( Comperio ) Stein Kåre Skytteren have worked on several different projects using DWR. The largest spanning a year and taking DWR and AJAX to its limits. Transforming it from a good old thick client application with multiple simultaneous pages to a “thin” JavaScript application. All in order to making it easier for users to interact with web applications. His interests also involves testing web applications as he is one of the founders of CubicTest - an open source web testing tool. Stein Kåre is currently working as a consultant at Comperio. He's got a Master of Technology degree in Computer Science from NTNU and Bachelor of Business and Administration degree from TØH/HiST.

Kito D. Mann is editor-in-chief of JSF Central ( www.jsfcentral.com) and the author of JavaServer Faces in Action (Manning). He is a member of several Java Community Process expert groups (including JSF and Portlets), and an internationally recognized speaker. Mann is also the Principal Consultant at Virtua, Inc., specializing in enterprise application architecture, training, development, mentoring, and JSF product strategy. He holds a BA in Computer Science from Johns Hopkins University.

Product manager ( Teleplan – mBricks ) Pål Berg er produktleder for mBricks – et software bibliotek for utvikling av applikasjoner for mobilen. Han har en Siv. Ing. grad i fra NTNU og har ti års erfaring innen softwareutvikling i forskjellige programmeringsspråk. De siste tre årene har interessen vært på utvikling av applikasjoner for mobilen i Java. Spesielt har fokuset vært på å lage mobile entreprise applikasjoner.

( Systek ) Bjørn Sloth works as a consultant and also as marketing manager in Systek. He holds a bachelor’s degree in Computer Science from University of Colorado and in economics from Norwegian School of Management. Bjørn has, since 1982, been involved in numerous development projects for Norwegian industry, the telecom sector and the bank/finance sector. He has been involved in mobile and mCommerce projects for the past 5 years and ”knows a lot about how the adoption of a mobile service can fail”.

( IBS JavaSolutions AB ) Erik Hellman is working as a Java Consultant for IBS JavaSolutions AB in Gothenburg, Sweden. He is a frequent speaker at JavaForum in Sweden and has also given a session on the Java bindings for the OpenGL API (JOGL) at JFokus 2007 (http://www.jfokus.se) and a session on rapid game development in Java at JavaOne 2007 (Session TS-3073).

Software Architect ( Tandberg ) Espen Berger is working as a developer and software architect in TANDBERG. He has 10 years of experience and is currently responsible for defining the Java architecture for a TANDBERG project. Special interest are asynchronous, multithreaded and light weight programming.

Senior Manager ( Accenture ) Holger is a senior manager in Accenture’s Technology Architecture group and has worked with enterprise Java solutions for over 7 years. He is now leading the architecture group on the Norwegian Pension Project, which is one of Norway’s largest Java and SOA projects. The project is using Spring WebFlow and JSF to create an internet self service solution for government pensions.

Principal Consultant ( Objectware ) Per Spilling is a developer/architect/process mentor with 19 years experience in working with object technology (C++, Ada, Python, Actor, Concurrent C++, CORBA, Java). He is currently working as a principal consultant at Objectware in Oslo where he is responsible for the Core Java technology group and associated course and mentoring services. His main work related interests are lightweight architectures, DDD, agile methods and agile development tools. Per was ScrumMaster and hands-on architect on the Storebrand Skade project, and has been a member of the JavaZone program committee for the last 3 years.
Kjartan is working as a senior consultant at Objectware AS and has about 6 years of programming experience primarily working with J2EE. He has lately been focusing on Service Oriented Architecture and services in specific.

( Haglind Datakonsult ) Mårten Haglind has been active as an independent senior Java Enterprise application architect and mentor for over ten years. For the last two years contracted as Solution Architect for a large scale development effort of a new generation of production systems for a major swedish car manufacturer using Java, Spring and SOA. Based in Gothenburg, Sweden he also works internationally. Other engagements include speaking assignments, co-authoring books and a long standing relation as a much appreciated Java and Agile course author and instructor for Programutvikling of Oslo.

Architect and Technology Competency Lead ( Bekk Consulting ) Trond Arve Wasskog is an architect and Technology Competency Lead at Bekk Consulting. He has been involved in Java and JEE application development for more than ten years, focusing on agile software development, testing and quality. Currently he is the architect of the NICS project at BBS

Seniorkonsulent ( Objectnet ) Christian har lang erfaring og kjernekompetanse innenfor mobile enheter, databaser, objektorientert utvikling, .Net og Open Source teknologi. Han har lang erfaring fra utvikling av trelags applikasjoner, web applikasjoner, web tjenester og SMS / MMS tjenester i Java og C#.
Konsulent ( Objectnet ) Asbjørn er konsulent og utvikler i Objectnet og har spisskompetanse innenfor objektorientert utvikling og utvikling av moderne webapplikasjoner. Asbjørn har mestergrad i informatikk fra Universitetet i Oslo.

Developer ( BBS ) Eirik Maus is a developer at BBS since 2005, and a research scientist at Norsk Regnesentral before that.

Developer, architect ( Bekk ) Per Mengshoel works as a developer and architect for BEKK. With valuable experience from working with enterprise Java for nearly 10 years, he is now focusing on dynamic languages. He heads the Systems development competency group in BEKK
Developer, architect ( Bekk ) Thomas Heiberg works as a developer and architect for BEKK and heads the Web architecture competency group in BEKK. His primary focus is simplifying web development in Java.

Konsulent ( Accenture ) Kenneth jobber til daglig som konsulent i Accenture. Han har erfaring med Java/J2EE siden 2004 med fokus på mellomvare. Har vært utvikler på store prosjekter hovedsakelig innenfor telekom. Har jobbet med Google Web Toolkit siden oktober 2006.
Konsulent ( Bouvet ) Håvard jobber til daglig som konsulent i Bouvet ASA. Han har Java erfaring siden 2001 med fokus på webbaserte applikasjoner. Har vært utvikler i flere store Java prosjekter, hovedsaklig innenfor telekom.

Organizational development consultant Martine Devos is organizational development consultant and trainer with comprehensive business background. She brought many projects and product development efforts back on track in both government and services sector. She has extensive managerial experience in both traditional and agile environments. She mastered successive waves of technology innovation to conceptualize, design and deploy mission critical business-focused ICT solutions in Fortune 500 companies and in the public sector. She trains and coaches teams in agile principles and practices of Scrum, Extreme Programming and Lean Software Engineering. For her first Scrum project – for the Belgian department of education, involving 500 schools -- she got the title of ICT manager of the year in 1998. She initiated and successfully implemented organizational and cultural change initiatives at both companywide and team level in multicultural environments. She has been Program Chair of EuroPlop, and frequent speaker at OOPSLA, ECOOP, TOOLS and JAOO conferences. She continues her research in the dynamics of projects and multi release product development and the impact of agile methods and estimation practices together with MIT and WPI graduate students.

Mike is an Agile coach and software developer who has been developing software applications since 1993. He has been practicing Example-Driven Development for several years, and has a deep understanding of how to use FIT effectively. Originally Mike studied Maths at Oxford University before getting into computing during his MSc in Fluid Mechanics at Bristol University. He spent the first few years of his career learning how to make money on fixed price projects at Logica (now LogicaCMG). Since 2001 he has been helping Agile software development teams deliver working software. Mike is a presenter at international industry conferences and helps organize London XpDay.
Steve was a pioneer of Agile software development in the UK, he has built applications for banks, ISPs, financial data providers, and specialist software companies. He has given training courses in Europe , America, and Asia. Previously, he worked in research labs, software houses, earned a PhD, and wrote shrink-wrap software for IBM. Steve also teaches in the Computer Science department at University College London. He is a presenter and organizer at international industry conferences, and was conference chair for the first London XpDay.

Mary Poppendieck has been in the Information Technology industry for over thirty years. She has managed software development, supply chain management, manufacturing operations, and new product development. She spearheaded the implementation of a Just-in-Time system in a 3M video tape manufacturing plant and led new product development teams, commercializing products ranging from digital controllers to 3M Light Fiber™. Mary is a popular writer and speaker, and coauthor of the book Lean Software Development, which was awarded the Software Development Productivity Award in 2004. A sequel, Implementing Lean Software Development, was published in 2006.

COO ( BEKK ) Reidar Sande is COO at Bekk Consulting and has 14 years experience from complex system development and integration engagements -- the last five years focusing on agile software development. He is a PMP-certified project manager and a CSP.
Sales Director ( Bekk Consulting ) Frithjof Frederiksen is Sales Director at Bekk Consulting and responsible for sales, account management and contract negotiations. He has 12 years of experience from consulting in UK, USA and Norway. Frithjof is also an active member of various industry committees in Oslo.

Organizational development consultant Martine Devos is organizational development consultant and trainer with comprehensive business background. She brought many projects and product development efforts back on track in both government and services sector. She has extensive managerial experience in both traditional and agile environments. She mastered successive waves of technology innovation to conceptualize, design and deploy mission critical business-focused ICT solutions in Fortune 500 companies and in the public sector. She trains and coaches teams in agile principles and practices of Scrum, Extreme Programming and Lean Software Engineering. For her first Scrum project – for the Belgian department of education, involving 500 schools -- she got the title of ICT manager of the year in 1998. She initiated and successfully implemented organizational and cultural change initiatives at both companywide and team level in multicultural environments. She has been Program Chair of EuroPlop, and frequent speaker at OOPSLA, ECOOP, TOOLS and JAOO conferences. She continues her research in the dynamics of projects and multi release product development and the impact of agile methods and estimation practices together with MIT and WPI graduate students.

project manager ( Bekk Consulting ) Tom J. Bang is a project manager and co-founder of Bekk Consulting (Norwegian IT- and management consulting company with 160 employees). He has 10 years project leadership experience from software development and started his career as a systems developer. He also has years of experience in roles like technical project manager, functional advisor and information architect. As a project manager and coach he has ten years experience with implementing IT-systems into organizations and was responsible for adapting agile methodologies into his company.

Senior Agile Coach ( Nordija ) James Coplien is Senior Agile Coach at Nordija and has recently been making focused inquiries into the failures of TDD in numerous consulting clients, and through focuses workshops and Open Space sessions at conferences such as QCon and the ACCU Conference.

CTO & Worldwide Scrum Consulting Practice Manager ( PatientKeeper, Inc ) Certified Scrum Trainer and Co-Creator of the Scrum Development Process See: http://www.infoq.com/presentations/The-Roots-of-Scrum

( Sun Microsystems )

( Ivar Jacobson International ) Dr. Ivar Jacobson is a father of components and component architecture, use cases, aspect-oriented software development, the Unified Modelling Language and the Rational Unified Process. He is the principal author of six influential and best-selling books. Ivar Jacobson is the chairman of Ivar Jacobson International which has subsidiaries in the US, UK, Korea, China, Singapore, Australia, Norway and Sweden. Ivar Jacobson Consulting, USA, UK, Korea, China, Singapore, Australia and Sweden

( Simula Research Laboratory ) Magne Jørgensen er utdannet sivilingeniør fra Universitetet i Karlsruhe og har en doktorgrad i informatikk fra Universitetet i Oslo. Han har tidligere jobbet som programmerer, prosessforbedringsleder og prosjektleder i Telenor og Storebrand, og er nå professor ved Simula Research Laboratory. Forskningsfokus er på estimering av IT-prosjekter og på ekspertvurderinger. Sammen med Barbara Kitchenham og Tore Dybå har han lansert metoden "Evidence-based software engineering". Han underviser i denne metoden både på Høgskolen i Rena og Universitetet i Oslo.

Kaare Nilsen is a software developer and architect. He has more than 10 years of programming experience and currently focuses on Open Source, AOP and lightweight component containers. He is a frequent presenter on various Java and Open Source topics, and is a active member in the Open Source community focused on the maven ecosystem hosted at codehaus.org

Sjefskonsulent ,Java Champion og president i javaBin ( Objectware AS ) President of the very successful Norwegian JUG javaBin. Sun Java Champion and Community Leader on java.net. Totto's leadership the JUG has built a very strong Java community in Norway, with hundreds of active members. javaBin has monthly meetings with international and local experts, runs one of the very best non-English Java sites (www.java.no) and annually hosts the JavaZone conference (www.javazone.no). Speaker on several conferences including JavaZone, OMG Information Days, the Software conference and various others. With over 20 years of professional programming experience spanning quite a few programming languages he has contributed in both international and domnestic projects in various roles, including project leader, technology mentor, software architect, lead developer, technology strategist and trainer. In total Totto probably is the premier Java Champion in Scandinavia...

Konsulent ( Objectware ) Erik er utdannet: Sivilingeniør i Datateknikk ved NTNU. (Ferdig juni 2007.) Han har gjennom to år hatt et frivillig verv som utvikler og prosjektleder hvor jeg har fått erfaring med bruk av Maven, Ant, Continuum, Spring og Hibernate.

Seniorkonsulent ( Mesan ) Som student ved UiO skrev Christoffer hovedfagsoppgave om modelldrevet utvikling og verktøystøtte til dette. Videre har han vært foredragsholder for Matergradsstudenter ved UiO om samme tema. Han har også holdt foredrag i Dataforeningen om dette fagområdet. Gjennom ulike utviklingsprosjekter i Mesan, har Daae-Qvale også opparbeidet seg en interesse for Agile utviklingsmetodikk og hvordan man best kan tilpasse denne til det enkelte prosjektet. I løpet av våren vil Daae-Qvale ta en sertifisering som Scrum master

Key Account Manager Stein Grimstad received the PhD degree in Informatics from the University of Oslo, Norway in 2006. He has 10 years' industry experience as software developer and solution architect. He is now a research scientist at Simula Research Laboratory in Oslo, Norway and an adviser at Objectnet AS. His research interests are software engineering and, in particular, software cost estimation.

CTO ( Bekk ) Aslak Hellesøy is the CTO of BEKK Consulting. Aslak has contributed to over a dozen Java and Ruby open source projects and is a passionate practitioner of agile development.

Developer ( Arktekk ) Kristian Nordal jobber til daglig hos Arktekk, som Java-utvikler med hovedfokus på open source og smidig utvikling. Han er commiter på Codehaus sitt prosjekt for Maven-plugins og har i flere år deltatt i utviklingen av Maven 2-plugins, som for eksempel den første pluginen for Jetty5 og appassembler-pluginen.

Software engineer and Java EE specialist ( 101 Solutions ) It is in 1987 in Munich, Germany that Alexandre Snaps discovers his natural ability for computer languages and starts their studies and gets involved in different Open Source projects. In 1999, he plunges into web development and three years later, he starts his own business, 101 Solutions (formely known as DOG7), focused on enterprise integration. He is developing web-applications for over ten years and using Java for more than seven years.

Konsulent ( Objectnet ) Degree in computer science (Cand. Scient.) from University of Oslo, Insititute for Informatics. Full time Java consultant since 2000. Currently employed by Unified Consulting. Passionate interest in computer science, particularly computer languages, with Java in particular.

( Jetbrains ) Mike Aizatsky is an accomplished speaker and advanced developer with nine years of Java Development experience to draw from. In his presentations, he has developed a knack for expressing challenging concepts in simple ways, so that his audiences walk away with new knowledge and a lot of ideas on how to apply it. Aizatsky received his Masters Degree with Honors in Mathematics in 2000, and now leads the Web and Enterprise Development Department of the IntelliJ IDEA project at JetBrains. He is a certified SCRUM master, and when he's not in front of a computer screen, enjoys playing jazz piano, hiking, and slalom rollerskating.

Bjørn Nordlund jobber som sjefskonsulent på Bankenes Betalings Sentral og har tidligere jobbet som forsker på Norsk Regnesentral.

Heidi Arnesen Austlid er direktør for Friprogsenteret. Friprogsenteret er en pådriver for verdiskaping i offentlig sektor og næringsliv. Som uavhengig kompetansesenter er vår oppgave å skape trygghet for valg, bruk og deling av fri programvare. Dette gjør Friprogsenteret ved å spre kunnskap, bygge nettverk og tilby arenaer for deling. Friprogsenteret eies av Troms og Buskerud fylkeskommuner, Rådet for Drammensregionen, Høyskolen i Buskerud, KS og IKT-Norge. Heidi Arnesen Austlid har tidligere vært prosjektleder i bransjeorganisasjonen IKT-Norge og seniorrådgiver i Kunnskapsdepartementet. Hun har arbeidet i en årrekke med IKT policy/strategi og har ledet en rekke større prosjekter.

Paul René started his coding career on the C64, but was really hooked when participating in the demo scene on the Amiga writing graphical presentations in assembly code. He has worked as a senior consultant at Telenor in Norway for the past 8 year and been part of establishing the Metro middleware. He loves to code, and do whatever it takes to get the opportunity to write code, whether it is at his desk, on the bus or in bed. Usemon has been developed on and off for the past 3 years, but got extra momentum when Steinar joined the project in Q3, 2007.
Steinar wrote his first program back in 1979 and has been trying to convince his family that programming is work and not fun ever since. He takes special interest in software engineering methods, design patterns and SQL databases. After establishing the DBMS vendor Informix in Norway in the late 90's, which was later sold to IBM, Steinar founded his second company focusing on CRM software. He is currently involved with his 3rd startup, focusing on a new SaaS solution for the Scandinavian SMB market.

Jonas Jacobi is co-founder and chief executive officer of Kaazing Corporation. Before co-founding Kaazing Jonas worked as VP of Product Management responsible for the product management and marketing strategy for Brane Corporation, a startup company in Silicon Valley. A native of Sweden, Mr. Jacobi has worked in the software industry for more than sixteen years. Prior to his appointment as vice president for Brane, he worked 8 years for Oracle as a Java EE and open source Evangelist, and product manager responsible for the product management of JavaServer Faces, Oracle ADF Faces, and Oracle ADF Faces Rich Client in the Oracle JDeveloper team. As CEO of Kaazing Corporation, Jonas sets the company’s business and product strategy and oversees all aspects of Kaazing’s operations and mission to become the world-wide leader in real-time software. Mr. Jacobi is a frequent speaker at international conferences and has written numerous articles for leading IT magazines such as Java Developer’s Journal, JavaPro, AjaxWorld, and Oracle Magazine. Jonas is co-author of the recently published book Pro JSF and Ajax: Building Rich Internet Components, (Apress).

Xavier Quesada is an Agile Coach and Project Manager. He's always been interested in management and methodology, and keeps himself busy learning, developing and implementing Lean, Scrum and XP best practices. He is currently working as a Scrum Coach at the Belgian Post.
It is in 1987 in Munich, Germany that Alexandre Snaps discovers his natural ability for computer languages and starts their studies and gets involved in different Open Source projects. In 1999, he plunges into web development. After having founded his own company, 101 Solutions in 2004, he went back to fulfill a more technical position within the Alten Group's IT division in Belgium, Axen. He participates in medium to large projects as development lead and architect. He speaks about Java development at events such as JavaPolis, JavaZone, Jazoon or JavaOne. He is using Java for over nine years.

Martine Devos is organizational development consultant and trainer with comprehensive business background. She brought many projects and product development efforts back on track in both government and services sector. She has extensive managerial experience in both traditional and agile environments. She mastered successive waves of technology innovation to conceptualize, design and deploy mission critical business-focused ICT solutions in Fortune 500 companies and in the public sector. She trains and coaches teams in agile principles and practices of Scrum, Extreme Programming and Lean Software Engineering. For her first Scrum project – for the Belgian department of education, involving 500 schools -- she got the title of ICT manager of the year in 1998. She initiated and successfully implemented organizational and cultural change initiatives at both companywide and team level in multicultural environments. She has been Program Chair of EuroPlop, and frequent speaker at OOPSLA, ECOOP, TOOL, SPA and JAOO conferences. She continues her research in the dynamics of projects and multi release product development and the impact of agile methods and estimation practices together with MIT and WPI graduate students.

Harald works as a senior developer at Escenic AS, and is the lead developer for their rich client offering, Content Studio. He has been working professionally with Java technologies since 1998, as consultant as well as in-house product development. The last couple of years he has been a member of the board of the Norwegian JUG (javaBin), as well as giving talks at javaBin, JavaZone and contributing to the java.no site.
Yngvar is a senior consultant and Swing expert at Bouvet ASA with Java experience since 1997. His primary fields of interest are AOP, rich user interfaces and interaction design. He is actively involved with the Norwegian JUG (javaBin).

Ron Tolido is Chief Technology Officer for Continental Europe and Asia Pacific for Capgemini. Also, he is a board member of the Open Group, a frequent speaker and a well-sought publisher of articles, columns and blogs.

Michael Feathers is a consultant with Object Mentor. He balances his time between working with, training and coaching various teams around the world. Prior to joining Object Mentor, Michael designed a proprietary programming language and wrote a compiler for it, he also designed a large multi-platform class library and a framework for instrumentation control. Publically, Michael developed CppUnit, the initial port of JUnit to C++, and FitCpp, a C++ port of the FIT integrated-test framework. Michael is also the author of the book 'Working Effectively with Legacy Code' (Prentice Hall 2004).

Mary Poppendieck started her career as a process control programmer, moved on to manage the IT department of a manufacturing plant, and then ended up in product development, where she was both product manager and department manager. After Mary left the corporate world in 1998, she found herself managing a government software project where she first encountered the word -Y´waterfall.¡ When Mary compared her experience in successful software and product development to the prevailing opinions about how to manage software projects, she decided the time had come for a new paradigm. She wrote the award-winning book ´Lean Software Development¡ to explain how the lean principles from manufacturing offer a better approach to software development. Over the past six years, Mary has found retirement elusive as she lectures and teaches classes with her husband Tom. Based on their on-going learning, they wrote a second book, ´Implementing Lean Software Development.¡ A popular writer and speaker, Mary continues to bring fresh perspectives to the world of software development.

Kaare Nilsen is a principal consultant at Arktekk AS working as a software developer and architect. He has more than 10 years of programming experience and is currently focusing on Open Source, AOP and lightweight component architecture. He is a frequent presenter on various Java and Open Source topics, and training instructor on Spring courses.

Tor-Morten Grønli er for tiden PhD stipendiat ved Brunel University, U.K og foreleser i programmering ved NITH. I tillegg arbeider han som Systemkonsulent hos Mesan AS. Gjennom forskning, undervisning og konsulentarbeid kommer han daglig i kontakt med varierte kompetanserelaterte problemstillinger innen Java, mobile og distribuerte systemer

Guillaume Laforge is the Groovy Project Manager, and Spec Lead of JSR-241, the Java Specification Request standardizing the Groovy dynamic language in the Java Community Process. As Vice President Technology of G2One, the company dedicated to the development of Groovy and Grails, he provides professional services around those technologies (training, support, and consulting). Guillaume co-authored the Groovy in Action best-seller book for Manning, and reviewed and wrote forewords for most of the Groovy and Grails books on the market. You can meet him at conferences around the world where he evangelizes the Groovy dynamic language, and the agile Grails web framework.

Scott Davis is an internationally recognized author and speaker. He is passionate about open source solutions and agile development. He has worked on a variety of Java platforms, from J2EE to J2SE to J2ME (sometimes all on the same project). Scott's books include Groovy Recipes: Greasing the Wheels of Java, GIS for Web Developers: Adding Where to Your Web Applications, The Google Maps API, and JBoss At Work. Scott is the Editor in Chief of aboutGroovy.com, a news and information website that tracks the latest developments in Groovy and Grails. He also writes a regular column for IBM DeveloperWorks -- Mastering Grails. Scott is a frequent presenter at national conferences (such as No Fluff, Just Stuff) and local user groups. He was the president of the Denver Java Users Group in 2003 when it was voted one of the top-ten JUGs in North America. After a quick move north, he is currently active in the leadership of the Boulder Java Users Group. Keep up with him at http://www.davisworld.org

Jérôme Bernard has over eight years experience developing J2SE, J2EE and distributed applications applied to a wide range of applications from banking to insurances as well as distributed applications using Jini. He is currently working on a solution called Elastic Grid which is a mix of Amazon EC2 and Rio/Jini. Some few things I've been working on: * various IntelliJ plugins (http://blog.elastic-grid.com/intellij/) * Rio committer (http://rio.dev.java.net)

Chief Consultant at Objectware, Sun Java Champion, and former president of the very successful Norwegian JUG javaBin. Member of the Advisory Board of java.net. Speaker on several conferences including JavaZone, JavaONE, CommunityONE, Microsoft Application Platform, Smidig, OMG Information Days, the Software conference and various others. With over 30 years of professional programming experience spanning quite a few programming languages he has contributed in both international and domestic projects in various roles, including project leader, technology mentor, software architect, lead developer, technology strategist and trainer.

Gilad Bracha is the creator of the Newspeak programming language. He is currently Distinguished Engineer at Cadence Design Systems. Previously, he was a Computational Theologist and Distinguished Engineer at Sun Microsystems. He is co-author of the Java Language Specification, and a researcher in the area of object-oriented programming languages. Prior to joining Sun, he worked on Strongtalk, the Animorphic Smalltalk System. He received his B.Sc in Mathematics and Computer Science from Ben Gurion University in Israel and a Ph.D. in Computer Science from the University of Utah.

Scott Davis is an internationally recognized author and speaker. He is passionate about open source solutions and agile development. He has worked on a variety of Java platforms, from J2EE to J2SE to J2ME (sometimes all on the same project). Scott's books include Groovy Recipes: Greasing the Wheels of Java, GIS for Web Developers: Adding Where to Your Web Applications, The Google Maps API, and JBoss At Work. Scott is the Editor in Chief of aboutGroovy.com, a news and information website that tracks the latest developments in Groovy and Grails. He also writes a regular column for IBM DeveloperWorks -- Mastering Grails. Scott is a frequent presenter at national conferences (such as No Fluff, Just Stuff) and local user groups. He was the president of the Denver Java Users Group in 2003 when it was voted one of the top-ten JUGs in North America. After a quick move north, he is currently active in the leadership of the Boulder Java Users Group. Keep up with him at http://www.davisworld.org.

Dr. Sutherland is a Certified ScrumMaster Practitioner and the inventor of the Scrum development process. He has been VP of Engineering and/or CTO for 9 software product companies, developing Scrum in 4 of them and introducing today's standard Scrum methodology to 5 of them. As CTO of PatientKeeper and IDX, he used Scrum to capture industry leadership for mobile/wireless/web application platforms in healthcare, enabling physicians to enhance revenue, reduce cost, and improve patient care. Recently, he has evolved automated Scrum tools for real-time management reporting, while reducing Scrum project manager overhead to 10 minutes a day and developer administrative overhead to 1 minute a day. This is an order of magnitude more efficient than traditional approaches to project management. In recent months, Dr. Sutherland has been a Scrum consultant to Microsoft, Yahoo, Ariba, Cadence, Adobe, GE Healthcare, and M3 Media Services bringing PatientKeeper Scrum practices to the broader software industry.

ames Ward is a Technical Evangelist for Flex at Adobe and Adobe’s JCP representative to JSR 286, 299, and 301. Much like his love for climbing mountains he enjoys programming because it provides endless new discoveries, elegant workarounds, summits and valleys. His adventures in climbing have taken him many places. Likewise, technology has brought him many adventures, including: Pascal and Assembly back in the early 90’s; Perl, HTML, and JavaScript in the mid 90’s; then Java and many of it’s frameworks beginning in the late 90’s. Today he primarily uses Flex to build beautiful front-ends for Java based back-ends. Prior to Adobe, James built a rich marketing and customer service portal for Pillar Data Systems.

Scott Davis is an internationally recognized author and speaker. He is passionate about open source solutions and agile development. He has worked on a variety of Java platforms, from J2EE to J2SE to J2ME (sometimes all on the same project). Scott's books include Groovy Recipes: Greasing the Wheels of Java, GIS for Web Developers: Adding Where to Your Web Applications, The Google Maps API, and JBoss At Work. Scott is the Editor in Chief of aboutGroovy.com, a news and information website that tracks the latest developments in Groovy and Grails. He also writes a regular column for IBM DeveloperWorks -- Mastering Grails. Scott is a frequent presenter at national conferences (such as No Fluff, Just Stuff) and local user groups. He was the president of the Denver Java Users Group in 2003 when it was voted one of the top-ten JUGs in North America. After a quick move north, he is currently active in the leadership of the Boulder Java Users Group. Keep up with him at http://www.davisworld.org.
Guillaume Laforge is the Groovy Project Manager, and Spec Lead of JSR-241, the Java Specification Request standardizing the Groovy dynamic language in the Java Community Process. As Vice President Technology of G2One, the company dedicated to the development of Groovy and Grails, he provides professional services around those technologies (training, support, and consulting). Guillaume co-authored the Groovy in Action best-seller book for Manning, and reviewed and wrote forewords for most of the Groovy and Grails books on the market. You can meet him at conferences around the world where he evangelizes the Groovy dynamic language, and the agile Grails web framework.
Bill Venners is president of Artima, Inc., publislher of Artima Developer (www.artima.com). He is author of the book, Inside the Java Virtual Machine, a programmer-oriented survey of the Java platform's architecture and internals. His popular columns in JavaWorld magazine covered Java internals, object-oriented design, and Jini. Active in the Jini Community since its inception, Bill led the Jini Community's ServiceUI project, whose ServiceUI API became the de facto standard way to associate user interfaces to Jini services. Bill is also the lead developer and designer of ScalaTest, an open source testing tool for Scala and Java developers, and coauthor with Martin Odersky and Lex Spoon of the book, Programming in Scala.
Gilad Bracha is the creator of the Newspeak programming language. He is currently Distinguished Engineer at Cadence Design Systems. Previously, he was a Computational Theologist and Distinguished Engineer at Sun Microsystems. He is co-author of the Java Language Specification, and a researcher in the area of object-oriented programming languages. Prior to joining Sun, he worked on Strongtalk, the Animorphic Smalltalk System. He received his B.Sc in Mathematics and Computer Science from Ben Gurion University in Israel and a Ph.D. in Computer Science from the University of Utah.
Robert C. Martin (Uncle Bob) has been a software professional since 1970 and is founder and president of Object Mentor Inc., in Gurnee, Illinois. Object Mentor, Inc., is an international firm of highly experienced software developers and managers who specialize in helping companies get their projects done. Object Mentor offers process improvement consulting, object-oriented software design consulting, training, and skill development services to major corporations worldwide. Mr. Martin has published dozens of articles in various trade journals, and is a regular speaker at international conferences and trade shows. Mr. Martin has authored and edited many books including: * Designing Object Oriented C++ Applications using the Booch Method * Patterns Langauages of Program Design 3 * More C++ Gems * Extreme Programming in Practice * Agile Software Development: Principles, Patterns, and Practices. A leader in the industry of software development, Mr. Martin served three years as the editor-in-chief of the C++ Report, and he served as the first chairman of the Agile Alliance.
Ola Bini is a Swedish developer currently working for ThoughtWorks in Stockholm, Sweden. He has been one of the core developers for JRuby since 2006 and is the author of the APress book Practical JRuby on Rails. He has much experience with Java, Ruby and LISP, and has been involved with several other open source projects - but nowadays JRuby takes most of his time. He has been known to like implementing languages, writing regular expression engines, YAML parsers and other similar things that exist at the borders of computer science.
Charles Nutter has been a Java developer since 1996, recently working as the senior Java architect at Ventera Corp and in September moved to Sun to work full-time on JRuby! He led the open-source LiteStep project in the late 90s and came to Ruby in the fall of 2004. Since then he has been a member of the JRuby team, helping to make it a true alternative Ruby platform.

Johannes Brodwall has been working with agile server–side technologies for a number of years. He is lead software architect at BBS Nordic where he helps the organization adopt agile methods as a means to better fulfill the spirit of regulatory restrictions. In his copious spare time he is an enthusiast and organizer in the Oslo Agile community. He writes regularly on his blog about agile software development, Ruby on Rail and Java.

Bill Venners is president of Artima, Inc., publislher of Artima Developer (www.artima.com). He is author of the book, Inside the Java Virtual Machine, a programmer-oriented survey of the Java platform's architecture and internals. His popular columns in JavaWorld magazine covered Java internals, object-oriented design, and Jini. Active in the Jini Community since its inception, Bill led the Jini Community's ServiceUI project, whose ServiceUI API became the de facto standard way to associate user interfaces to Jini services. Bill is also the lead developer and designer of ScalaTest, an open source testing tool for Scala and Java developers, and coauthor with Martin Odersky and Lex Spoon of the book, Programming in Scala.

Morten har jobbet som utvikler og arkitekt i over 15 år på ulike plattformer (Java, Microsoft .NET, MVS/Cobol). Han har tidligere hatt arkitektrollen i utviklingsprosjekter basert på både Java/JSP/Servlet og full J2EE stack. De tre siste årene har han jobbet som arkitekt og utvikler i et Java-prosjekt basert på Java SE, Spring, Hibernate og Maven2. Etter lang og tro tjeneste i amerikanske konsulentselskaper jobber han nå som selvstendig konsulent i Udnæs Consulting. Øverst på listen over faglige interesser er Java og Ruby programmering, testdreven utvikling og metodikk for systemfornyelse.

Howard Lewis Ship is the creator of Tapestry, and a frequent speaker at JavaOne, the No Fluff Just Stuff symposium series and other conferences.

Janniche Haugen is a Senior Consultant at Bekk Consulting, in the competency group for quality and testing. She has 4+ years experience with Java development, 3 of them spent using FitNesse for automated requirement testing.

Dr. Bernard Traversat is the Director of the Advanced Development product organization at Sun Microsystems Inc.. Bernard has lead the development of a number of emerging and disruptive technologies: P2P network technology (Project JXTA), wireless and mesg networking, 3D immersive virtual world (Project Wonderland), 3D Desktop (Project Looking Glass), semantic web, content sharing network, consumer robotics, RFID and sensor network . He is evangelizing Sun new technologies and working with customers and partners. Previously he led Sun's effort in pervasive computing for small consumer devices. Prior to that, he worked at the NASA Ames Research Center on distributed-memory operating systems for massively parallel supercomputers.

Trond Arve Wasskog is a developer and CTO at Bekk Consulting. He has been working with Java and Java EE application development for more than ten years, focusing on agile software development, testing and maintainability.

Project manager with Bekk Consulting As,PMP, ScumMaster In depth experience with long-running (large) software projects, in very volatile business contexts Interests include: Software estimation, project management methods, software development best practices

Thomas holds a MSc degree in computer science from the University of Oslo and has been professionally developing Java applications since the spring of 2004. He maintains a passion for Java development, Agile methods and a wide range of open-source projects. During waking hours he works as a consultant for Objectware AS.

Eugene is the Director of Systems Infrastructure at LeapFrog Enterprises, the largest educational toy company in the United States, and he is also a contributing editor to TheServerSide.com. In 2006 he led the first-time adoption of Linux and other open-source technologies at Wal-Mart Stores Information Systems Division as chief liaison between Walmart.com Global and the ISD Technology Council.

Bruce Snyder is a veteran of enterprise software development and a recognized leader in open source software. Bruce has experience in a wide range of technologies including Java EE, Enterprise Messaging and Service Oriented Integration. In addition to his role as a software consultant, Bruce is also an Apache Member, a co-founder of Apache Geronimo and a developer for Apache ActiveMQ, Camel, ServiceMix. He is the co-author of Professional Apache Geronimo, Beginning Spring Framework 2 both from Wrox Press and is currently co-authoring Apache ActiveMQ In Action for Manning Publications. Bruce also serves as a member of various JCP expert groups and is a recognized international speaker at industry conferences. Bruce lives in beautiful Boulder, Colorado with his family.

Rickard Öberg works at Jayway, with a focus on how to improve the software development tools. His interests lie in writing frameworks which both take into account todays new infrastructure for large distributed systems while at the same time adhering to the principles of domain driven design. He is the founder of several popular OpenSource Java frameworks, such as JBoss, XDoclet and WebWork and a frequent speaker at international conferences on topics related to enterprise software development.

Trygve Laugstøl er daglig leder i Arktekk og er i tillegg utvikler, arkitekt med mange års erfaring med Java-utvikling. Han har lang erfaring med utvikling og bruk av åpen kildekode som kjerneutvikler av Maven 2 og Continuum. Trygve har jobbet lenge med utvikling av plugins som støtter opp om smidig utvikling og som rådgiver innenfor disse områdene.
Kristian Nordal jobber til daglig hos Arktekk, som Java-utvikler med hovedfokus på open source og smidig utvikling. Han er commiter på Codehaus sitt prosjekt for Maven-plugins og har i flere år deltatt i utviklingen av Maven 2-plugins, som for eksempel den første pluginen for Jetty5 og appassembler- pluginen.

Karol Harezlak is the NetBeans Mobility Pack project lead for the Visual Mobile Designer in Sun Microsystems. He is an author of several articles about software tools, Java and Java ME. He presented at many Java/Java ME/Netbeans related events in Europe and United States.
Lukas Hasik is the NetBeans Mobility QE lead for Sun Microsystems responsible for NetBeans Mobility Pack. Lukas started at Sun more than seven years ago and has moved from Java EE, to the NetBeans core platform to Java ME in that time. He holds a Masters Degree in Software Engineering. Lukas presented at JavaOne and Jazoon conferences.

Unn Aursøy is also employed at Bouvet as a Java developer. Her management skills and knowledge of Customer Driven Project has steered the project clear of many pitfalls.
Stig Lau is employed at Bouvet as a Java developer. He sports an interest for leeding edge technology, Topic Maps, music composition and knowledge sharing.

Eirik R. Larsen works as a software engineer in Ciber Norway, an Oslo-based IT consultancy. He graduated as Master of Computer Science from the Norwegian University of Science and Technology in 2005. Eiriks main focus is Java Enterprise-related technologies such as JSF, Hibernate, Seam and EJB.
Mario is an experienced developer and architect currently working with SOA and Java development at CIBER Norway. Ciber is an acknowledged consulting company, delivering mission critical solutions with strong focus on Java, and related technologies. Mario holds a Master of Computer Science from Norwegian University of Science and Technology. His main interests are SOA Governance, Process engines, Scrum and software development on the Java platform. This is the second year Mario holds a presentation at JavaZone.

Maxim Zakharenkov (Exigen Inc.) has over 10 years of experience in software development and over 7 years of developing Java desktop applications. Currently he leads a development team at Exigen Inc. in the projects using Swing, Webstart and remote communications with server side.

Raghavan "Rags" Srinivas is the CTO of Technology Evangelism at Sun Microsystems looking at new technology directions and trends. His general focus area is in distributed systems, with a specialization in interoperability, mobility and security. He has spoken on a variety of technical topics at conferences around the world and teaches graduate classes in the evening. He publishes a standards column and has represented Sun at a number of standards bodies. He also serves in the organizing committee for several industry-wide technical conferences. Rags brings with him about 20 years of software development and about 7 years of technology evangelism experience. He worked for Digital Equipment Corporation before joining Sun. He has worked on several technology areas, including internals of VMS, Unix and NT. He has evangelized a number of technology areas including the early releases of Java, Java EE, Java and XML, Java ME, AJAX and Web 2.0 and so on. Rags holds a Masters degree in Computer Science from the Center of Advanced Computer Studies at the University of Louisiana at Lafayette.

Mr. Ivanov has over 15 years of experience in software development and over 7 years of developing grid computing and distributed middleware, a vision and pragmatic view of where development technology is going, and high quality standards in software engineering. Back in 1996, Mr. Ivanov was one of the pioneers in using Java technology for server side middleware development while working at T-Systems GmbH, one of the largest European System Integrator. Mr. Ivanov has held various positions architecting and leading software product development for start-up companies and working with well-established companies such as Adaptec, Visa and BEA Systems. Mr. Ivanov is an active member of Java middleware community and is a contributor to Java specifications as a member of JSR-107. Mr. Ivanov holds a Master's degree in Electro Mechanics from Baltic State Technical University, Saint Petersburg, Russia.

Senior konsulent i Team Identity hos Software Innovation Interesser: * Sikkerhets- og Software- arkitektur * Sikring av web applikasjoner * Hvordan riktig utviklingsprosess kan brukes i en sikkerhetssammenheng Erfaring: Flere år som utvikler og arkitekt for nettbanksikkerheten i større nordisk bank Flere års erfaring med BankID og andre PKI løsninger Sikkerhetsarkitekt i et SOA prosjekt for en stor offentlig etat som håndterer sensitive personopplysninger

Raghavan "Rags" Srinivas is the CTO of Technology Evangelism at Sun Microsystems looking at new technology directions and trends. His general focus area is in distributed systems, with a specialization in interoperability, mobility and security. He has spoken on a variety of technical topics at conferences around the world and teaches graduate classes in the evening. He publishes a standards column and has represented Sun at a number of standards bodies. He also serves in the organizing committee for several industry-wide technical conferences. Rags brings with him about 20 years of software development and about 7 years of technology evangelism experience. He worked for Digital Equipment Corporation before joining Sun. He has worked on several technology areas, including internals of VMS, Unix and NT. He has evangelized a number of technology areas including the early releases of Java, Java EE, Java and XML, Java ME, AJAX and Web 2.0 and so on. Rags holds a Masters degree in Computer Science from the Center of Advanced Computer Studies at the University of Louisiana at Lafayette. He enjoys running, hiking and eating, especially spicy food.

Henrik Dæhli er Software Engineer og har 3 års erfaring fra utvikling av mobile applikasjoner i Java Micro Edition. Han har ansvar for spesifikasjon og implementering av sikkerhetsprotokoller i mBricks, et software bibliotek for utvikling av applikasjoner for mobilen.

Henning is working as a senior consultant in Skiinfo, the European skiing portal, and has nearly 10 years of Java server side experience. The last two years he has been the hands-on architect for FINN.no's map solutions.

Geert is a senior engineer at Terracotta Inc., the founder of Uwyn, and the creator of the RIFE project, which provides a full-stack Java Web application framework for quickly building maintainable applications. He also started or contributed to projects like Bla-bla List, OpenLaszlo, Drone, JavaPaste and Gentoo Linux. Geert has spoken at TSSJS US & Europe, JavaOne, NFJS, QCon, JavaZone, Øredev, Java In Action, EuroOSCON, Fosdem and JavaPolis. He has been nominated and accepted as a Java Champion, mainly for his work on the RIFE project and its support for native Java continuations.

Dan Diephouse is an accomplished enterprise architect and open source developer who specializes in web services and service-oriented architecture. He is the founder of the popular XFire web service framework and a committer on several other open source projects, including the Apache ServiceMix, XmlSchema and Continuum projects. He is also the founder of Envoi Solutions http://envoisolutions.com/, which provides training, support and services for companies doing web services integration and SOA development. Homepage: http://netzooid.com/blog

Bjørn Bjerkeli currently works as a Senior Consultant in Zenior AS, a Norwegian consulting company. Bjørn has been implementing large-scale distributed systems in Java for insurance companies, banks and major European telecom providers since 1997. He has been working for companies like Nokia and Sybase among others. Although Bjørn often spends much of his time in design and mentoring, he enjoys it when he is engaged in serious coding and development. Bjørn has been member of the program committee for the last three years and is a board member of javaBin. Bjørn writes about his experiences at: http://devperspective.blogspot.com/
Eirik Maus is just a programmer at BBS. He has worked with Bjørn Bjerkeli and several other Javazone speakers on a large project there.

A Java Champion since September 2005, Kirk Pepperdine is a primary contributor to javaperformancetuning.com, which is widely regarded as the premier site for Java performance tuning information, and is the coauthor of Ant Developer's Handbook. He has been heavily involved in application performance since the beginning of his programming career and has tuned applications in a variety of languages: Cray Assembler, C, Smalltalk, and, since 1996, Java technology. He has also worked on building middleware for distributed applications. Pepperdine began his career in biochemical engineering and has researched high-performance liquid chromatography for Ottawa University and the National Research Council of Canada. He worked with Cray supercomputers at the Canadian Department of Defense, as a consultant at Florida Power & Light, and has been a senior consultant with GemStone Systems. He is currently an independent consultant and an editor at TheServerSide.com.

Erlend Oftedal (Bekk) Senior utvikler og leder av faggruppen for sikkerhet.
Markus Harboe (mnemonic) Avdelingsleder for profesional services. Startet javaBin i 1996/98. :-) Lang erfaring med sikkerhetstesting av webapplikasjoner.

Erich Gamma is a Distinguished Engineer at IBM Rational Software's Zurich lab. He is the technical lead of the Jazz project and Rational Team Concert. He was the original lead of the Eclipse Java development environment and was on the Project Management Committee for the Eclipse project. Erich is also a member of the Gang of Four, which is known for its classical book, Design Patterns - Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software. Erich has collaborated with Kent Beck on developing JUnit, the de facto standard testing tool for Java software, and on writing the book contributing to Eclipse: Principles, Patterns, and Plug-ins.

Arjen Poutsma is a senior consultant at SpringSource with more than ten years' experience in commercial software environments. During this time he has worked with both Java EE and Microsoft .NET. Three years ago, Arjen started to specialise in Web Services and Service Oriented Architectures. During this period, he has worked for some of the largest organizations in the world helping them better understand enterprise Java and how SOAs fit into their organizations. In part from his experiences with these organizations, Arjen founded the open source Spring Web Services project and continues to lead the technical direction and development as the project lead for Spring Web Services. This project aims at facilitating development of document-driven web services. Arjen has also contributed to various other open source projects, including XFire, NEO and others. He is a regular speaker at Java and SOA conferences, including JavaPolis, The Spring Experience, JavaZone, W-JAX, and many others.

Ola Bini is a Swedish developer currently working for ThoughtWorks in Stockholm, Sweden. He has been one of the core developers for JRuby since 2006 and is the author of the APress book Practical JRuby on Rails. He has much experience with Java, Ruby and LISP, and has been involved with several other open source projects - but nowadays JRuby takes most of his time. He has been known to like implementing languages, writing regular expression engines, YAML parsers and other similar things that exist at the borders of computer science.
Charles Nutter has been a Java developer since 1996, recently working as the senior Java architect at Ventera Corp and in September moved to Sun to work full-time on JRuby! He led the open-source LiteStep project in the late 90s and came to Ruby in the fall of 2004. Since then he has been a member of the JRuby team, helping to make it a true alternative Ruby platform.

Filip is an architect at Ordina Belgium. He's been involved in enterprise java development since 2001, spending most of his time developing web based applications for large companies. Filip is always striving for better quality and productivity, and he has a particular interest for test automation, continuous integration and code quality. He's co-founder and lead developer of the Unitils framework, and has previously spoken at the Javapolis and SpringOne conferences.

Steinar Årdal is a Managing Consultant at Capgemini and Certified ScrumMasters. For the last two years he has been working on a large project in Public Sector as Solution Architect and Technical Project Manager, where he has has been responsible for introducing Scrum. Steinar has an MSc (Siv.ing) from NTNU/UCSB and has 6 years experience on various development and integration projects in Norway and UK, mainly as a Developer and Architect.
Geir Magne Trengereid is a Managing Consultant at Capgemini and Certified ScrumMasters. For the last two years he has been working on a large project in Public Sector as Solution Architect and Technical Project Manager, where he has has been responsible for introducing Scrum. Geir Magne has an MSc (Siv.ing) form NTNU and has 16 years of experience from a wide range of projects and in the later years mostly as a Technical Project Manager or Project Manager.
Kristoffer Moum is a senior developer with more than seven years of experience in developing enterprise Java. He has experience as a developer, architect, lead developer and scrum master in various projects. Also, he has done mentoring and architecture reviews and has previously held various presentations for javaBin and JavaZone. Kristoffer regularly works as a course instructor with Spring and Maven.
Sommer holds an MBA from Agder College with specialization in internationalisation and project management. He is Ph.D candidate at NTNU, Institute for Industrial Economics and Technology Management in the area of business development. Sommer has over 10 years experience as project manager and consultant from IT-projects in public and private sector. He is certified Scrum Practitioner and certified Scrum master with experience from several project methodologies such as PMI, ValueSAP, Stepping Up, and agile/lean mangement.
Anders Magnus har erfaring fra flere utviklingsprosjekter i offentlig sektor, og har det siste 1,5 året jobbet som utvikler og sertifisert ScrumMaster i NAVs pensjonsprosjekt. Han er engasjert i praktisk implementering av smidig metodikk og bruk av smidige utviklingsverktøy.
Thomas har flere års erfaring fra utviklingsprosjekter i offentlig sektor, og har det siste 1,5 året jobbet som utvikler og sertifisert ScrumMaster i NAVs pensjonsprosjekt. Han er interessert i smidig utvikling, både når det gjelder teknologi, metodikk og sammenhengen mellom disse.

James L. (Jim) Weaver is the Chief Technical Officer at LAT, Inc., a technology consulting and software development company. He writes books, speaks for groups and conferences, and provides training and consulting services on the subjects of Java and JavaFX. His latest book is entitled JavaFX Script: Dynamic Java Scripting for Rich Internet/Client-Side Applications.

Steve Freeman is an independent consultant specialising in the Agile delivery of software. A pioneer of Agile software development in the UK, he has built applications for banks, ISPs, financial data providers, and specialist software companies. He has given training courses in Europe , America, and Asia. Previously, he worked in research labs, software houses, earned a PhD, and wrote shrink-wrap software. Steve has also taught at University College London. He is a presenter and track chair at international industry conferences, and was conference chair for the first London XpDay. Steve is a developer of the jMock and nMock libraries. At present, he is co-writing a book, with Nat Pryce, "Growing Object-Oriented Software, Guided by Tests" for Addison Wesley. http://www.mockobjects.com/2008/07/growing-object-oriented-software-guided.html Steve Freeman Winner of the Agile Alliance Gordon Pask award 2006

Peter Norrhall is a system architect, mentor and educator and he has been working in several Java Enterprise projects in Sweden, London and Singapore. His motto is less-is-more and therefore embraces the IoC concept and he has been working with IoC containers even before the term was defined. Peter is an appreciated presenter and started as software developer in -91. Peter works as an independant consultant (http://movlin.se)
Niclas is a software development coach, consultant, educator and writer with a deep passion for the software development craft and he loves good design and architecture. He started working as a developer in 1992 and drawn from experience, he knows that some choices makes significant difference in software development, like languages, tools, communication and processes. This is the reason behind his affection for dynamic languages, test-driven development, code generation and agile processes. Niclas is a co-founder of factor10 (http://factor10.com) and he is also the lead editor of the architecture community at InfoQ (http://infoq.com). Niclas blogs at http://niclasnilsson.se.

Cameron Purdy is Vice President of Development at Oracle. Prior to joining Oracle, Mr. Purdy was the CEO of Tangosol, whose revolutionary Coherence Data Grid product provides reliable and scalable data management across the enterprise. Mr. Purdy has over ten years of experience with Java™ and Java-related technology. As a software visionary and industry leader, Mr. Purdy is a frequent presenter at industry conferences and has received a number of awards in recognition of his contribution to the Java community, including twice being named as a JavaOne RockStar and being recognized in TheServerSide’s “Who’s Who in Enterprise Java”. He regularly participates in industry standards development and is a specification lead for the Java Community Process.

Ole-Martin Mørk jobber som Manager i Bekk Consulting og er leder for faggruppen Systemutvikling. Han har jobbet med Java og Java EE utvikling i åtte år. Den siste tiden har han økt sitt fokus på andre programmeringsspråk som Ruby og Scala.

Lene Pettersen arbeider som informasjonsarkitekt, usability‐ og interaksjonsdesigner hos Bouvet. Hun er utdannet sosialantropolog innenfor området kognitiv antropologi og holder jevnlig fordrag om menneskets klassifikasjonsprosesser, tenkning og representasjoner av virkeligheter (javaBin, WebSphere User group, BouvetOne, mfl) og har tidligere blant annet arbeidet som foreleser i/ansvarlig for etnografisk film ved Universitet i Oslo. Hun har også studert film‐ og medievitenskap ved Universitetet i København og hypermedia ved Universitetet i Oslo.

Rasmus er konsulent og utvikler i Know IT Objectnet og har jobbet med smidig prosjektstyring i flere prosjekter de siste årene, noe han også har holdt innlegg om i regi av Javabin. Hans hovedbudskap er at man ikke skal binde seg til en arbeidsmetode, men forsøke seg fram med ulike teknikker og verktøy. Ved å ha et kritisk blikk til hva som virker og ikke virker kan man stadig forbedre måten man jobber på.
Vidar har bosatt seg i sørlandsidyllen Risør og er prosjektleder og utvikler i Know IT Objectnet - Arendal. Han har 13års erfaring innen systemutvikling og har hatt ledende roller innenfor en rekke prosjekter. Han trives best med 'glad-programmering' i team som sammarbeider tett med engasjerte brukere som gir ris og ros.

Bernadette is the usability specialist at Escenic AS, and works with user experience and user interface design for the Escenic products. She has a masters degree in HCI (human computer interaction) from Heriot-Watt University in Scotland and has been working with user experience in Norway since 1994 and has experience working with UNIX interfaces, web and windows interfaces for Microsoft and Apple platforms. She was active in getting the first two usability conferences in Norway, Yggdrasil organized.
Yngvar is a senior consultant and Swing expert at Bouvet ASA with Java experience since 1997. His primary fields of interest are AOP, rich user interfaces and interaction design. He is actively involved with the Norwegian JUG (javaBin).
Kristin Halvorsen works as a Business Manager for Digital Business Innovation at Objectware AS. She holds a M.Sc. in computers and information systems from the Norwegian Technical and Scientific University (NTNU). Her focus is on the business value of good user experience. She leads the continuous development of Objectware Experience Framework - a methodology, tools and techniques framework to assure the alignment between business, users and technology. She lectures in eBusiness at BI the Norwegian School of Management.
Harald works as a senior developer at Escenic AS, and is the lead developer for their rich client offering, Content Studio. He has been working professionally with Java technologies since 1998, as consultant as well as in-house product development. The last couple of years he has been a member of the board of the Norwegian JUG (javaBin), as well as giving talks at javaBin, JavaZone and contributing to the java.no site.
Lene Pettersen works as an interaction designer and information architect at Bouvet ASA. She holds a Bachelor degree (hovedfag) in Social anthropology from University of Oslo, within cognitive anthropology. She also studied film at the University of Copenhagen in Denmark and holds regularly lectures about our surrounding world and ways of grasping and bringing meaning to reality. She lectured earlier in ethnographic film for undergraduate students at the University of Oslo.

Jevgeni has been the R&D lead of the largest custom software development company in the Baltics (Webmedia, Ltd) for the last five years. During that time he has spearheaded the movement to decrease the development turnaround time. As a result two products (JavaRebel and JspWeaver) were developed under the trademark ZeroTurnaround, of which Jevgeni is the technical lead. Both projects contributed directly to the immense reduction in turnaround time. Jevgeni is also a co-founder of the open source Aranea project and has spoken on many international conferences including JavaZone, JavaPolis and TheServerSide Symposium. Jevgeni personal blog can be found at dow.ngra.de.

Ellen D. Varsi er utdannet fra Høgskolen i Østfold og Universitetet i Oslo, og er idag ansatt som konsulent i javaavdelingen hos Bouvet ASA. Hun har arbeidet i IT-bransjen siden 1988, fortrinnsvis med objekt-orientert systemutvikling på ulike teknologiplattformer. Hun har arbeidet både som utvikler, rådgiver og prosjektleder i både større og mindre prosjekter, og hun har i perioder hatt spesielt fokus på metodikk, kravhåndtering, arkitektur og objektorientert analyse og design med UML. Hun programmerer fremdeles og helst med java.

Nils Christian trives best når han kan være med å skape produkter som gleder både brukerne og sponsorene. Han har lang erfaring med smidig systemutvikling som programmerer, arkitekt, prosjektleder og coach, blant annet fra ThoughtWorks og som CTO i Know IT Objectnet. I dag er Nils Christian konsulent i sitt eget firma, Wasteless. Nils Christian holder ofte foredrag og kurs for bedrifter og brukerforeninger, og han har presentert på konferanser som Agile, XP Day London, SPA, JavaZone og DND Software. Nils Christian er aktiv i det norske smidig-miljøet og er en av entusiastene bak Smidig-konferansen.

Frode currently works as a consultant at Know IT Objectnet AS. He has been working as a developer, architect, advisor and project manager in defense, oil & energy, telecom and public sector since 1995. Frode has a wide range of professional interests, but enjoys in particular working with the customer to identify their needs and creating the good solution.
Stein has more than 10 years’ industry experience as software developer and solution architect. His professional interests cover many areas of software development, but are particularly related to the interaction between clients and vendors. He received a phd from UiO in 2006, and is a member of the estimation project at Simula Research Laboratory. As a co-founder of Wasteless, Stein work closely with their industrial partners. He frequently talks at international conferences, give courses, and is the author of several papers published in international journals and magazines. Topics include expert estimation, process improvement and evaluation of software technology.

Software Architect at Exie AS, a BI software vendor. Worked for 10 years in the Norwegian market as a developer and consultant. Passionate about distributed applications and GUI rich end user applications

Tom J. Bang is a project manager and co-founder of Bekk Consulting (Norwegian IT- and management consulting company with 200 employees). He has 10 years project leadership experience from software development and started his career as a systems developer. These days he mostly likes talking about focusing value and the product, communicating efficiently and bringing out the talent and smile in people. "So how is the project going?" "We are not developing projects, we are developing products to achieve a goal!"

Eitan Suez is an independent software developer, primarily known for developing a system for extremely agile software development by the name of JMatter (open source, GPL, see http://jmatter.org/ ). This talk is a reflection of Eitan's experiences with this approach of constructing software solutions in a fashion where feature implementations are decoupled from the domain.

Arnar Lundesgaard works as consultant/developer for Bouvet. He has been developing high-profile dynamic information-rich portals using Python for 7 years.

Heather VanCura is the Manager of the Program Management Office (PMO) of the Java Community Process (JCP) program. In this role, she is responsible for the day-to-day operations of the JCP program, as well as the marketing and communications strategy and activities for the JCP program. Heather has worked in the JCP Program Office at Sun Microsystems since 2000. Prior to Sun, she worked with a variety of technology and science companies, including Microsoft, Cisco, Roche Bioscience, Apple, and the Santa Cruz Operation. She holds a B.S. degree in Business Administration from California State University.

Robert C. Martin (Uncle Bob) has been a software professional since 1970 and is founder and president of Object Mentor Inc., in Gurnee, Illinois. Object Mentor, Inc., is an international firm of highly experienced software developers and managers who specialize in helping companies get their projects done. Object Mentor offers process improvement consulting, object-oriented software design consulting, training, and skill development services to major corporations worldwide. Mr. Martin has published dozens of articles in various trade journals, and is a regular speaker at international conferences and trade shows. Mr. Martin has authored and edited many books including: * Designing Object Oriented C++ Applications using the Booch Method * Patterns Langauages of Program Design 3 * More C++ Gems * Extreme Programming in Practice * Agile Software Development: Principles, Patterns, and Practices. A leader in the industry of software development, Mr. Martin served three years as the editor-in-chief of the C++ Report, and he served as the first chairman of the Agile Alliance.

Julien Viet is the founder and project lead of the open source project JBoss Portal since 2004, he has been working with Java portal and CMS technologies and started as a contributor of the JBoss Application Server project in 2002. Julien represented Red Hat on the expert group of the JSR 286 Portlet 2.0 specification and is the lead architect of the JBoss Portlet Container which is an implementation of the specification. Julien is also a member of JSR-283: Content Repository for Java Technology API 2.0 specification.

Dr. Kjetil Moløkken-Østvold is a Senior Partner at Conceptos IT Development (www.conceptos.no). He has previous experience as Assistant Director and Postdoctoral researcher at Simula Research Laboratory, and as founder of Project Economics. Moløkken-Østvold received his Masters degree (Sivilingeniør) in Informatics from the University of Oslo in June 2002. In December 2004 he received the PhD-degree in Informatics from the University of Oslo and Simula Research Laboratory. He has been the author and co-author of over 2o scientific papers published internationally. Topics include cost estimation, agile software development, project management, public software projects, collaboration and communication, group processes and research ethics. An updated list of publications can be found at http://simula.no/people/kjetilmo/bibliography. In addition to these publications, Moløkken-Østvold has extensive experience as a speaker. He has presented popularized talks for various parties including Abelia, Sintef, ICT-Norway, Steria and Government department officials, as well as on venues such as Agile 2007, Agile 2008, JavaZone 2006 and Smidig 2007.
Hans Gallis is the manager of Symphonical AS (www.symphonical.com), a company he founded in 2005. Symphonical is developing a highly flexible web based platform for collaboration and communication within teams and projects. He has previous experience as a researcher at Simula Research Laboratory and various experiences as an IT consultant. Gallis received his Masters degree in informatics from the University of Oslo in February 2002. He has been the author and co-author of several scientific papers published internationally mainly within the field of Software Engineering and agile software development. An updated list of publications can be found at www.simula.no/people/hansga/bibliography. In addition to these publications, Gallis has presented at several national and international conferences, seminars as well as company-internal and local meetups.

Anders is a seasoned software developer and speaker. The ΄enterpriseyness‘ of EJB drove him to Microsoft .NET back in 2002, He quickly made a name for himself in the Microsoft community by using his Java-experiences to get a head start on fellow developers. In 2006 he got reacquainted with his lost love - Java, and today he is a polyglot combining the best of both worlds to build better software. Anders is the founder of the Quaere project and a contributor to a few open-source projects. He has given talks on many conferences and user group meetings and is known for talks with few slides and lots of code. Anders lives in Norway where he works as an enterprise architect (the hands-on kind) for Storebrand. You can read his blog at http://andersnoras.com.

Alexis Moussine-Pouchkine is a GlassFish evangelist. He has 10 years of customer-facing java experience and is now the two-way link between the core GlassFish developers and the broader community which involves presenting in various conferences around the world. Alexis is an editor of "The Aquarium" blog and a reviewer and translator of various Java and XML books. Alexis lives in Paris, France.

Aslak Hellesøy is the Chief Scientist of BEKK Consulting, a Norwegian consulting company that delivers business-critical custom solutions in .NET, Java and Ruby.

Eirik Bjørsnøs er en uavhengig konsulent og gründer som holder til i Trondheim. Mye av tiden hans går med til produktutvikling og oppdrag, men han setter også av rikelig med tid til å prøve ut nye teknologier. Spesielt gøy synes han det er å finne nye måter å gjøre komplekse ting enklere på. Eirik er hovedutvikler for Maven-pluginen for OS X-applikasjoner på Codehaus, han har laget verdens raskeste søkemotor for versjonskontoll og skriver av og til på bloggen sin simplericity.com

Serial entrepeneur, expert in enterprise architecture and investment banking systems - CTO of Incept5

Dipl. Ing. André Fleischer is a software architect employed by the otto group located in Hamburg (www.ottogroup.com). Emphases of his work are Java EE technologies and software development processes. In his projects he is responsible as a software architect for the structure of architecture and software. A further emphasis lies in its knowledge of object-oriented proceedings and methodologies, which he introduces as a coach in his projects. His knowledge and his experiences are based on a large number of different projects in diverse contexts within the last 10 years of his professional career. In the last years his interest are focused on the topic of the technical quality of software and how the quality can be achieved with a lasting effect. He is also a committer for the open source quality tool XRadar.

Chief Architect in Kantega. 7 years of experience developing insurance systems. Using nature as the main source of inspiration to design computer systems. Special field of interest; Artificial Intelligence.
CTO in Kantega. 17 years of experience in the software industry, more than 10 years of experience as a software architect. Special interests include software architecture, frameworks, patterns, programming.

Jørund Berg Leknes, født 24. januar 1982, er en norsk politiker som representerer SV. For tiden er han politisk rådgiver for Heidi Grande Røys, som er statsråd i Fornyings- og administrasjonsdepartementet. Til tross for sin unge alder, har han allerede betydelig erfaring fra rikspolitikken. Han ble valgt inn på Stortinget som vararepresentant for SV fra Sør-Trøndelag i perioden 2001-2005 og igjen i perioden 2005-2009. Han møtte i Stortingets finanskomité første gang som 20-åring (som vara for Øystein Djupedal). Selv om han ikke vil puttes i bås som sektorpolitiker, er det innenfor IKT-politikk han har bemerket seg sterkest. Jørund Leknes har bl.a stilt flere spørsmål om åpen kildekode og fri programvare i Stortingets spørretime, og han har også ledet IKT-utvalget i SV som skisserte tiltak for å gjøre Norge til en ledende IKT-nasjon. Grunnen til fokuset på IKT, er at han er en av få SV-politikere som behersker dette fagfeltet[trenger referanse]. Han har programmert siden han var 14 år, og behersker bl.a programmeringsspråkene C, Java og C++. Leknes har havnet blant de ti beste i NM i programmering fire ganger.

I'm affiliated to SpringSource, the company that creates and sustains the Spring Framework and associated projects. I was the sixth committer on the Spring Framework and have been working on and with Spring since the beginning of 2003.

Kevlin Henney is an independent consultant based in the UK. He specialises in programming languages, OO design, patterns, development process and software architecture, helping teams adopt techniques and improve their software development through training, mentoring and reviewing. He is and has been a columnist for various magazines and web sites, including the Reg Developer channel of The Register, SearchSoftwareQuality.com and Better Software. He is also coauthor of two volumes in the Pattern-Oriented Software Architecture series, A Pattern Language for Distributed Computing and On Patterns and Pattern Languages.

Stian Børresen MSc. Ten years experience in 3D graphics, web, mobile and rich client development. He is currently working as a consultant specializing in mobile application development using java.
Else Nordhagen. Dr. Scient. Research Scientist at Telenor Research & Innovation. More than thirty years of experience with object oriented design and implementation, 3D graphics, theoretical computer science and GUI design (from Smalltalk in the late seventies, to J2ME today).
Bjørn Remseth. Cand. Scient. Research scientist at Telenor Research & Innovation. Bjørn has more than twenty years of experience as a sysadmin, developer, systems architect and research scientist.

Dr. Jim Webber is the Global Architecture lead for ThoughtWorks where he works on dependable Web Services-based systems for clients worldwide. Jim was formerly a senior researcher with the UK E-Science programme where he developed strategies for aligning Grid computing with Web Services practices and architectural patterns for dependable Service-Oriented computing. Jim has extensive Web Services architecture and development experience as an architect with Arjuna Technologies and was the lead developer with Hewlett-Packard on the industry's first Web Services Transaction solution. Jim is an active speaker in the Web Services space and is co-author of the book "Developing Enterprise Web Services - An Architect's Guide." Jim holds a B.Sc. in Computing Science and Ph.D. in Parallel Computing both from the University of Newcastle upon Tyne. His blog is located at http://jim.webber.name

Kim Andreassen holds a Master of Information Technology, and works as Senior Consultant and team leader at Capgemini Norway. He has several years of experience from several java projects, and has the last 18 months been working as team leader for one of the development teams at NAV.
Bent Are Melsom holds a Master of Science from NTNU, and works as a Managing Consultant at Capgemini Norway where he leads the java department. He has many years of experience, and has the last 18 months been working as technical architect for Capgemini at the NAV Pensionprogram.
Audun Wangensteen holds a Master of Science from NTNU and works as Senior Consultant at Capgemini Norway. The last 18 months he has been working as team leader for one of the development teams at NAV.

Trond Strømme is an employee of Sun Microsystems Norway. As part of the software team he works with GlassFish and OpenESB as well as with some JVM tuning and performance related issues. Trond has worked with Java in general and J2EE application servers in particular for the last eight years.

Filip van Laenen har vært ansatt i Computas i 11 år og har vært involvert i Java-prosjekter stort sett hele tiden. For tiden er han teknisk prosjektleder for MATS-prosjektet hos Mattilsynet og leder for Computas’ fagnettverk for Software Engineering.
Anders Sandberg Nordbø har vært ansatt i Computas i 1 år, og har vært en del av MATS-prosjektet siden han startet. Han hadde ansvaret for kartklienten i MATS fra planleggingen til implementasjonen.

Jason van Zyl is the Founder and CTO of Sonatype, the leader in Java development infrastructure whose customers include Intuit, eBay, Qualcomm and eTrade, and he has over 10 years of experience in open source and proprietary enterprise software development. Prior to Sonatype, Jason was the founder Periapt, Inc., a company that provided software infrastructure development services to Fortune 500 companies such as Toyota Corp., Bank of America, and Coca-Cola Co. Before Periapt, he worked as a Technology Architect at Compusense, a world leader in sensory analysis and data research. An open source enthusiast, Jason is one of the founders of the Apache Maven project, and founder the Plexus IoC framework, and the Apache Velocity project. Jason currently serves as Chair of the Apache Maven Project Management Committee. He has been involved with the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) for seven years, helped to found Codehaus, a well respected incubation facility for open source community projects, and is a frequent speaker at many major software conferences, including JavaOne, EclipseCon, EmergingTech, and ApacheCon.

Costin Leau, a SpringSource Senior Software Engineer, has been working with Java EE since 2000. Costin spends the majority of his time on product development for a number of Spring and Spring related projects, including Spring Java Config, Spring's JPA support, Pitchfork and Spring Dynamic Modules which he leads. While a generalist, Costin has a strong interest in data access and aspect oriented programming. Costin is one of the most active Spring Framework Forum contributors, with more than 3600 posts by early 2007.

Sanjiv Augustine is the President of LitheSpeed, an innovative Agile and Lean training, consulting and product development company, and an industry-leading agile and lean expert. He is a co-founder and board member of the Agile Project Leadership Network (APLN). He is also the author of several publications and the book Managing Agile Projects (Prentice Hall 2005); and the founder and moderator of the Yahoo! Agile Project Management discussion group. He presents regularly at several agile conferences and user groups worldwide, and project management conferences including Project World and Project Summit. Sanjiv has assisted clients in deploying agile and lean methodologies at many institutions large and small. As a management coach and consultant, he has advised in the enterprise rollout and adoption of Scrum at several Fortune 250 companies. As an in-the-trenches practitioner, he has personally managed agile projects varying in size from five to over one hundred people and coached numerous project teams.

Jon Bing (født Tønsberg, Norge 1944), cand jur (Oslo) 1969, dr juris (Oslo) 1982, professor, Senter for rettsinformatikk, Det juridiske fakultet, Universitetet i Oslo. Dr juris hon causae (Stockholm 1997 og København 1998), Computer Law Pioneer Award (San Diego 1993), Visiting Professor, King's College (London) 1998-2000. Telenor nordiske forskningspris for “information technology and society” 2001, den nordiske juristprisen (2002), Rosing ærespris fra Den norske dataforening (2006). Ridder av første klasse, St Olavs orden (1999). Doktoravhandling om rettslige informasjonssystemer og kommunikasjonsprosesser. Andre forskningsområder omfatter personvern, immaterialrett, interlegal rett og styring av Internettet, alt i forbindelse med informasjonsteknologi. Mange publikasjoner, nasjonalt og internasjonalt. Medlem av Det Norske Vitenskaps-Akademi og Svenska Ingeniörvetenskapliga Akademien. Tidligere verv omfatter Council of Europe Committee on Legal Data Processing (leder), Norsk filmråd (leder), Norsk kulturråd (leder), National Organising Committee World Library and Information Congress 2005 Oslo (leder), Hovedstyret i Norges Forskningsråd (medlem) og Board of Governors, European Cultural Foundation (medlem). Aktuelle verv omfatter Personvernnemnda (leder), Programkomiteen for Samfunnssikkerhet og risiko (SAMRISK), Norges forskningsråd (leder), og Generic Name Support Organization (GNSO), Internet Corporation For Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) (medlem). Skjønnlitterær debut 1967 (med Tor Åge Bringsværd), har siden utgitt romaner, noveller, essays, oversettelser, dramatikk for scene, radio og fjernsyn, libretti for operaer, redigert antologier mv. Priser for beste ungdomsroman (1975), Rivertonprisen (1979), beste tegneserie (1980), Skolebibliotekarforeningens pris (1985), NKS undervisningspris for en fjernsynsserie om hverdagsjus (1990), Brages ærespris for bidrag til norsk litteratur (2001), Bibliotekforeningens ærespris (2004).

Trond Arve Wasskog is a developer and CTO at Bekk Consulting. He has been working with Java and Java EE application development for more than ten years, focusing on agile software development, testing and maintainability.

Christian er godt over middels interessert i kommunikasjon og prosessforberinger. Han har i flere år jobbet i konsulentbransjen som prosjektleder og utvikler før det. Han har lenge hatt sterkt fokus på smidige metoder og ledelsesfilosofi, testing og kvalitet i prosjekter. Han er styremedlem i Norsk Forum for Smidig Systemutvikling og en av arrangørene av Smidig200X-konferansene.
Trond er siviløkonom av utdannelse, utvikler av hjerte, prosjektleder av yrke. Han har alltid vært opptatt av å få til gode ting i team, og fra XP dukket opp i 1999 har han konsentrert seg om smidige metoder som prosjektstyringsfilosofi. Han er styremedlem i Norsk Forum for Smidig Systemutvikling, styremedlem i DNDs faggruppe for Effektiv Programvareutvikling, og en av grunnleggerne av Steria Smidig Forum.

Emil Ong is the Chief Evangelist and a lead developer of Caucho Technology. He comes from an academic research background, having studied security, systems, and peer-to-peer technology to gain his M.S. in Computer Science at UC Berkeley. When Emil joined Caucho in 2006, he began by working on Quercus, Caucho's 100% Java implementation of PHP, and the SOA offerings in Resin, Caucho's screamingly fast Java application server. In 2007, Emil became the Chief Evangelist of Caucho, adding public speaking engagements, community management, and press relations to his engineering duties. Emil is based in the San Francisco Bay Area.

Magne Jørgensen er utdannet sivilingeniør fra Universitetet i Karlsruhe og har en doktorgrad i informatikk fra Universitetet i Oslo. Han har tidligere jobbet som programmerer, prosjektleder og prosessforbedringsleder i Telenor og Storebrand, og er nå professor ved Simula Research Laboratory.

Jonas Lindholm har jobbet i Accenture siden 1998 og har jobbet med forskjellige teknologier på både backend og frontend. De siste 6 årene har han i stort sett jobbet med utvikling og arkitektur på Java plattformen. Jonas har hovedfag i informatikk fra Universitetet i Oslo.

Sten Aksel er blant Know IT Objectnets mest erfarne konsulenter. Han stiller gjerne opp som scrum master, arkitekt, teknisk ansvarlig, funksjonelt ansvarlig og utvikler. Sten Aksel trives best i smidige team og er tilhenger av smidig og testdrevet utvikling.

Konsulentsjef i Know IT Objectnet
Seniorkonsulent i Know IT Objectnet

Trygve Laugstøl jobber i Arktekk som utvikler, arkitekt og har mange års erfaring med Java-utvikling. Han har lang erfaring med utvikling og bruk av åpen kildekode som kjerneutvikler av Maven 2 og Continuum. Trygve har jobbet lenge med utvikling av plugins som støtter opp om smidig utvikling og som rådgiver innenfor disse områdene.
Kristian Nordal jobber til daglig hos Arktekk, som Java-utvikler med hovedfokus på open source og smidig utvikling. Han er commiter på Codehaus sitt prosjekt for Maven-plugins og har i flere år deltatt i utviklingen av Maven 2-plugins, som for eksempel den første pluginen for Jetty5 og appassembler-pluginen.

Greg Young is co-founder and CTO of IMIS, a stock market analytics firm in Vancouver BC. With over 10 years of varied experience in computer science from embedded operating systems to business systems and everything in between, he brings a pragmatic and often times unusual viewpoint to discussions. In his spare time you can often find Greg on experts-exchange.com where he runs the .NET section of the site, writing articles for InfoQ.com, speaking at local .NET groups throughout the south eastern US and now the pacific northwest, or floating upside down through rapids in his kayak.

Trond Marius er seniorkonsultent hos Mesan. Han har jobbet som ScrumMaster i flere prosjekter og har slåss mot kompleksitet i prosess, produkt, mennesker, kunder og oppgaver. Han jobber for å hjelpe teamet til å holde sin fokus på det viktigste og dermed levere verdi så hurtig og med så høy kvalitet som mulig.

John is a regular speaker at technology and banking conferences, his background in technology goes back some 30 years and investment banking over 20. John has held several senior positions in the worlds leading banks from head of technology to global chief architect at banks like Paribas and JP Morgan. In 2000 he co-founded a company (C24) producing Java integration solutions for investments banks (SWIFT, FpML ISO-20022 etc.) and sold that to IONA technologies in 2007. Since then John has invested in and co-founded 2 new companies, Onix & Incept5. Between them they have over 100 clients from people trading their own money in Monaco, a gold bullion exchange in the Middle East, large investment banks, credit-card transaction processing in Beverley Hills and stock exchanges, the work is never dull. John has three young boys, a French wife and enjoys photograph.

Eric Evans, author of Domain-driven Design: Tackling Complexity in the Heart of Software, is a thought leader in software design, domain driven design and domain modeling and particularly focuses on strategic design.

Currently works as a consultant for Bouvet ASA with Java experience since 1999. Primary fields of interests are systems integration and Web development. A board member for the Norwegian Java User Group (javaBin), author of integration related articles and a presenter.

Alexis Moussine-Pouchkine is a member of the GlassFish team and has been acting as the ambassador for the project for the past two years. Alexis is a former speaker at JavaZone 2007/2008 and CommunityOne North 2009 is Oslo and has some NOK's left over from previous traveling he'd like to spend.

Phil Wills has experience with a broad range of languages and technologies, but has spent the past three years focussing on redeveloping guardian.co.uk with a focus on building a strong domain model and achieving high performance.

Kevlin Henney is an independent consultant and trainer based in the UK. He specialises in programming languages, OO design, patterns, development process and software architecture, helping teams adopt techniques and improve their software development through training, mentoring and reviewing. He is and has been a columnist for various magazines and web sites, including Better Software, The Register, SearchSoftwareQuality.com and Java Report. He is also coauthor of A Pattern Language for Distributed Computing and On Patterns and Pattern Languages, two volumes in Wiley's Pattern-Oriented Software Architecture series.

Vegard Hartmann er fagleder for Kvalitet og testing i Bekk Consulting. Han har siden 2005 jobbet både med nyutvikling og forvaltning av en rekke applikasjoner.

My main goal with programming and system development is to make things simpler and more managable. I try to make systems with less dependencies that are more self contained.

Jason van Zyl is the Founder and CTO of Sonatype, the leader in Java development infrastructure whose customers include Intuit, eBay, Qualcomm and eTrade, and he has over 10 years of experience in open source and proprietary enterprise software development. Prior to Sonatype, Jason was the founder Periapt, Inc., a company that provided software infrastructure development services to Fortune 500 companies such as Toyota Corp., Bank of America, and Coca-Cola Co. Before Periapt, he worked as a Technology Architect at Compusense, a world leader in sensory analysis and data research. An open source enthusiast, Jason is one of the founders of the Apache Maven project, and founder the Plexus IoC framework, and the Apache Velocity project. Jason currently serves as Chair of the Apache Maven Project Management Committee. He has been involved with the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) for seven years, helped to found Codehaus, a well respected incubation facility for open source community projects, and is a frequent speaker at many major software conferences, including JavaOne, EclipseCon, EmergingTech, and ApacheCon.

Utvikler i Idium AS, som bruker Sling som plattform i et webpubliseringsprodukt. Committer til Apache Sling, og medlem av Sling PPMC.

Mark Fisher is a Senior Engineer at SpringSource and lead of the Spring Integration project. He is also a committer on the core Spring Framework and the Spring BlazeDS Integration project. Mark has provided consulting services for clients across numerous industries throughout North America, and he has trained hundreds of developers how to effectively use the Spring Framework and related projects. Mark speaks frequently at conferences and user groups in America and Europe.

Open Source Application Architect at Ambient Ideas Matthew McCullough is an energetic 12 year veteran of enterprise software development, open source education, and co-founder of Ambient Ideas, LLC, a Denver consultancy. He is an outspoken advocate for the use of open source libraries in enterprise applications. Matthew currently is a member of the JCP, reviewer for technology publishers including O'Reilly, President of the Denver Open Source Users Group, and speaker on the No Fluff Just Stuff 2009 tour. His experience includes successful J2EE, SOA, and Web Service implementations for real estate, financial management, and telecommunications firms, and development of several open source libraries. Matthew jumps at opportunities to evangelize, present, and educate teams on the benefits of open source. His current focuses are Maven, iPhone and Android applications, and OSS debugging tools. Matthew currently resides in beautiful Denver, Colorado, USA with his wife and baby daughter, who all are active in nearly every outdoor activity Colorado offers.

Stein Grimstad er avdelingsleder for Software Engineering-avdelingen ved Simula Research Laboratory i Oslo, og rådgiver i Wasteless AS. Han er også sentral i Cantara. Hovedinteressen er software engineering med et spesielt fokus på kravhåndtering og kostnadsestimering.

Scott Davis is the founder of ThirstyHead.com, a training company that specializes in Groovy and Grails training. Scott published one of the first public websites implemented in Grails in 2006 and has been actively working with the technology ever since. Author of the book "Groovy Recipes: Greasing the Wheels of Java" and two ongoing IBM developerWorks article series ("Mastering Grails" and in 2009, "Practically Groovy"), Scott writes extensively about how Groovy and Grails are the future of Java development. Scott teaches public and private classes on Groovy and Grails for start-ups and Fortune 100 companies. He is the co-founder of the Groovy/Grails Experience conference and is a regular presenter on the international technical conference circuit. In 2008, Scott was voted the top Rock Star at JavaOne for his talk "Groovy, the Red Pill: How to blow the mind of a buttoned-down Java developer".

Kohsuke Kawaguchi is a senior staff engineer at Sun Microsystems. He is a creator of Hudson, and has involved in a number of projects such as JAXB, Metro, and GlassFish v3. He also hosts many projects on java.net, such as args4j, and com4j. More information on him can be found at http://www.kohsuke.org/.

Aslak er medlem av BEKK forvaltning og jobber der med å assistere nyutvikling og videreutvikle forvaltningsapplikasjoner. Gjennom dette arbeidet har han erfart hva som avgjør momentum i forvaltningsfasen og hvordan dette kan endres.

Baard er ansatt som konsulent i Java-avdelingen hos Bouvet. Han har jobbet med Java de siste 5 årene med fokus på smidige metoder og testdrevet utvikling. Baard er en ivrig tilhenger av fri programvare.

Rune F. Åsprang er utdannet sivilingeniør i kommunikasjonsteknologi ved Norges Teknisk-Naturvitenskapelige Universitet (NTNU). Som IT-rådgiver i BEKK Management Consulting fyller Rune rådgivningsroller som ligger i skjæringspunktet mellom forretning og teknologi, og har et særlig fokus på strategiutvikling og –realisering, prosesskartlegging og analyse.

Tobias er fagsjef i Know IT Objectnet. Han har 11 års erfaring fra konsulentbransjen hvor han stort sett har jobbet med utvikling av store mellomvareløsninger implementert i Java. Tobias er tidligere styremedlem i javaBin og satt i JavaZones programkomite fra 2004-2009. Tre av disse årene fungerte han som leder.

Trond er siviløkonom av utdannelse, utvikler av hjerte og prosjektleder av yrke. Han har alltid vært opptatt av å få til gode ting i teams, og fra de første smidig-bøkene dukket opp i 1999, har han konsentrert seg om smidige metoder som prosjektstyringsmetodikk. Han er opptatt av prosjektøkonomi og ønsker å gi prosjekter et tydeligere økonomisk fundament. Trond var medarrangør av Smidig 2007 og Smidig 2008 og er en av grunnleggerne av Steria Smidig Forum. Han arbeider som senior prosjektleder i Steria AS

Neal Ford is Software Architect and Meme Wrangler at ThoughtWorks, a global IT consultancy with an exclusive focus on end-to-end software development and delivery. He is also the designer and developer of applications, instructional materials, magazine articles, courseware, video/DVD presentations, and author and/or editor of 6 books spanning a variety of technologies, including the most recent The Productive Programmer. He focuses on designing and building of large-scale enterprise applications. He is also an internationally acclaimed speaker, speaking at over 100 developer conferences worldwide, delivering more than 600 talks. Check out his web site at http://www.nealford.com. He welcomes feedback and can be reached at nford@thoughtworks.com.

Neal Ford is Software Architect and Meme Wrangler at ThoughtWorks, a global IT consultancy with an exclusive focus on end-to-end software development and delivery. He is also the designer and developer of applications, instructional materials, magazine articles, courseware, video/DVD presentations, and author and/or editor of 6 books spanning a variety of technologies, including the most recent The Productive Programmer. He focuses on designing and building of large-scale enterprise applications. He is also an internationally acclaimed speaker, speaking at over 100 developer conferences worldwide, delivering more than 600 talks. Check out his web site at http://www.nealford.com. He welcomes feedback and can be reached at nford@thoughtworks.com.

Jahn Arne Johnsen is a Senior Consultant at BEKK Consulting. He is head of the company's Application Management Unit and works in projects as a System Developer / Architect and Project Manager. Jahn Arne has a strong interest in agile team organization and value realization. He is especially interested in how the agile process could be adapted for application management in order to still maintain value focus and accommodate proper SLA-handling.

Rune Schumann works as Senior Software Architect at the R&D department in TANDBERG, and is cutting code at a daily basis in a Java based video conferencing product. Main interests are distributed systems designed for high performance under a large amount of requests, clean code and software architecture. Rune has 10 years of experience from Java projects working as software developer, architect, and project manager. In addition Rune has written the articles “Evolutionary integration with ESBs” and “SEDA to Ensure Service Availability” posted at InfoQ.

Ken Sipe is a Technology Director with Perficient, Inc. (PRFT), an application architect, frequent technical speaker, author of several articles and courses, and software and methodology mentor. He is founder of CodeMentor, Inc., focusing on training and mentor in distributed computing technologies. Ken has delivered hundreds of private and public presentations including JavaOne, BorCon and NFJS.

Anders er Managing Consultant og teknologileder for Java hos Capgemini Norge. Han har over 5 års erfaring med utvikling i Java som utvikler og arkitekt. Han er engasjert i smidig utvikling og open source, og har jobbet med smidige metoder i flere år. Han mener at prosess og teknologi må møtes og spille på lag hvis vi skal nå målet om effektiv, god og bærekraftig systemutvikling.

Trond Arve Wasskog er utvikler og CTO i Bekk Consulting. Han har jobbet med Java og Java EE applikasjonsutvikling i mer enn ti år, med fokus på smidig utvikling, kvalitet og vedlikeholdbarhet.

Oddbjørn Kvalsund er Accenture Technology Solutions i Oslo sin Subject Matter Expert (SME) på Core Java Programming. Han er utdanna master i informatikk frå Høgskolen i Østfold og Newcastle University og er aktiv i javaBin-miljøet i Oslo.

Jonas Bonér is a programmer, mentor, speaker and author who spends most of his time consulting as well as lecturing and speaking at developer conferences world-wide. He has worked at Terracotta, the JRockit JVM at BEA and is an active contributor to the Open Source community; most notably created the AspectWerkz (AOP) framework, committer to the Terracotta JVM clustering technology and been part of the Eclipse AspectJ team. Read more on his blog: http://jonasboner.com

Per Otto er selvstendig konsulent og har jobbet med utviklingsprosjekter på JEE siden 2000, som utvikler, teamleder og arkitekt. Per Otto praktiserer testdrevet utvikling i sin hverdag og jobber for at alle rundt han også skal gjøre det, blant annet gjennom prosjektet BDoc (bdoc.googlecode.com), som lager dokumentasjon fra tester. De siste 6 årene har Per Otto hatt sentrale utviklingsroller på store smidige prosjekter, og gjennom dette også fått mye erfaring med hva som fungerer og ikke fungerer når prosjekter skal benytte automatisert test i stor skala.

Marcus Ahnve heads the Stockholm office of ThoughtWorks, a global IT consultancy aiming to revolutionize the IT industry and the way software is delivered. He specializes in agile methodologies and web development. Marcus experience with agile development dates back to 1996 and his first professional project which was done is Smalltalk. In 2001 he got hooked on XP and has since then explored new ways to make development more effective, valuable and fun. Marcus is one of the founders of the conference Agila Sverige which is held yearly in Stockholm.

Bjørn works as a regional specialist at Oralce, specializing in Oracle's middleware solutions. For the last couple of years he’s spent the majority of his time helping customers build scalable and highly performing applications using datagrids. Before joining Oracle, he worked over five years with Java EE, spending a lot of time with various application servers, ORM-tools and other lightweight frameworks.

Principal Consultant at Webstep, Sun Java Champion, president of IASA Norway, founder of Cantara AS and stiftelsen for fremme av programvareutvikling i Norge. Former president of the very successful Norwegian JUG javaBin and JavaZone. Member of the Advisory Board of java.net. Speaker on several conferences including JavaZone, JavaONE, CommunityONE, Microsoft Application Platform, Smidig, Go Open, OMG Information Days, the Software conference and various others. With over 30 years of professional programming experience spanning quite a few programming languages he has contributed in both international and domestic projects in various roles, including project leader, technology mentor, software architect, lead developer, technology strategist and trainer.

Thore Johnsen jobber i dag som system- og løsningsarkitekt i MeldingsTjenester hos ErgoGroup AS. Han har bred erfaring innen design og utvikling av software og har jobbet med mange ulike teknologier og systemer siden midten av 90-tallet. Fra tidlige løsninger basert på Microsoft teknologi, C++ og CORBA jobber han i dag stort sett med løsninger basert på Java og JEE teknologi.

PhD Student at Simula Research Laboratory / University of Oslo Topic of work: Software Maintainability and Program Comprehension Master in Applied Information Technology with a specialization in Software Engineering and Management. Two years of relevant industry experience in three countries (Costa Rica, USA, Sweden) within diverse organizations. More than one year experience as academic adviser for undergraduate students at a higher education institution in Sweden. More than one year experience as a private consultant, providing services as Software Systems development, Systems Integration, Systems Analysis and Web/Graphic Design and Development.

Scott Davis is the founder of ThirstyHead.com, a training company that specializes in Groovy and Grails training. Scott published one of the first public websites implemented in Grails in 2006 and has been actively working with the technology ever since. Author of the book "Groovy Recipes: Greasing the Wheels of Java" and two ongoing IBM developerWorks article series ("Mastering Grails" and in 2009, "Practically Groovy"), Scott writes extensively about how Groovy and Grails are the future of Java development. Scott teaches public and private classes on Groovy and Grails for start-ups and Fortune 100 companies. He is the co-founder of the Groovy/Grails Experience conference and is a regular presenter on the international technical conference circuit. In 2008, Scott was voted the top Rock Star at JavaOne for his talk "Groovy, the Red Pill: How to blow the mind of a buttoned-down Java developer".

Mr. Diephouse is a software architect at MuleSource, the company behind the open source Mule integration framework. Here he is focused on building open source web services solutions and MuleSource’s SOA governance platform, Galaxy. In addition to his work on Mule and Galaxy, he is a co-founder of the web services framework Apache CXF, a founder of several other projects including XFire, SXC, and Jettison, and participates in several others whenever possible.

Eivind is a senior consultant and manager working for BEKK in Oslo. BEKK is a consulting company specializing in enterprise web integration. Eivind has 10 years experience developing enterprise Java/J2EE applications. He has worked on various Open Source projects and the Hudson Grinder Plugin is his latest initiative.
Ole-Martin has worked as a programmer and architect for 9 years. He is primarily a Java Developer, but he is also programming Ruby, PHP and Python. At Open AdExchange they are developing an Advertisement System that will scale to billions of requests pr month. In order to achieve this goal, they rely heavily on a scalable architecture and good and scalable performance tests. In order to scale as much as possible, they are using Amazon Web Services as their hosting platform both for their application and the performance tests.

Knut Erik Borgen er utdannet Cand Scient i år 2000 har bred erfaring fra serverside, web 2.0 og Swing utvikling. Jobber i dag for Know IT Objectnet som arkitekt, teknisk ansvarlig, funksjonelt ansvarlig og utvikler. På hobbyfronten utvikler han open source software i PHP og Java og trives svært godt når det står utviklingsoppgaver i kø. Stor tilhenger av smidig og testdrevet utvikling.
Jan Henrik Gundelsby er utdannet Cand Scient og har over 10 års erfaring med serverside Java-teknologi, både J2EE og lettvektsrammeverk. Han jobber i dag for Know IT Objectnet som teknisk prosjektleder, arkitekt og utvikler for et større offentlig IT-prosjekt. Jan Henrik er en ivrig lettvekts-fantast som forsøker å jobbe mot smidige arkitekturer og løsninger som gir økt produktivitet for utvikleren.

Arnfinn Sandnes har jobbet som utvikler og arkitekt i over 20 år. Han har jobbet mye med spesifikasjoner, valg av arkitektur, design, integrasjon og implementasjon på JEE plattformen.

Janniche har 5 års erfaring med utvikling av mer eller mindre domenedrevne Java applikasjoner. Hun er for tiden fagleder for Java i Bekk og har høy fokus på utvikling av god Java kode. Favoritt sitat: "Expert programmers are those who write code even idiot programmers can understand. Idiot programmers are those who write code not even expert programmers can understand."

Arjen Poutsma is a senior software engineer at SpringSource with fifteen years' experience in commercial software environments. During this time he has worked with both Java EE and Microsoft .NET. Four years ago, Arjen started to specialise in Web Services and Service Oriented Architectures. During this period, he has worked for some of the largest organizations in the world helping them better understand enterprise Java and how SOAs fit into their organizations. In part from his experiences with these organizations, Arjen founded the open source Spring Web Services project and continues to lead the technical direction and development as the project lead for Spring Web Services. This project aims at facilitating development of document-driven web services. He currently works on the REST features in Spring 3.0. Arjen has also contributed to various other open source projects, including XFire, Axis2, and others. He is a regular speaker at Java and SOA conferences, including JavaPolis, The Spring Experience, JavaZone, W-JAX, and many others.

Jevgeni Kabanov is the founder and lead of ZeroTurnaround (www.zeroturnaround.com), a development tools company that focuses on productivity. Before that he worked as the R&D director of Webmedia, Ltd, the largest custom software development company in the Baltics. As part of the effort to reduce development time tunraround he wrote the prototype of the ZeroTurnaround flagship product, JavaRebel, a class reloading JVM plugin. Jevgeni has been speaking at international conferences for several years, including JavaPolis/Devoxx, JavaZone, JAOO and so on. He also has an active research interest, publishing several papers on topics ranging from category theoretical notions to typesafe Java DSLs. Besides the commercial products made for ZeroTurnaround, Jevgeni is a co-founder of two open-source projects -- Aranea and Squill. Aranea (www.araneaframework.org) is a web development and integration platform based on strong object-oriented principles. Squill (squill.dev.java.net) is a typesafe internal DSL for constructing and executing SQL queries. Jevgeni's personal blog can be found at dow.ngra.de.

Ross Mason is Founder and CTO of MuleSource, Inc., and the creator of the open source Mule integration platform. Mason founded the Mule project in 2003 with the ideal to simplify the process of building application integration and ESBs that had been made overly complex by the commercial vendors. Now Mule is the most widely used open source ESB and integration platform. Prior he was CEO of SymphonySoft Limited, an EU-based company providing services for large-scale integration projects.

Øyvind Kvangardsnes er konsulent i BEKK. Han tjener til sitt daglige brød ved å skrive Javakode, og har nylig fullført sin mastergrad som omhandlet om bruk av Scrum.

Anders works as a Managing Consultant and Technology Leader, Java at Capgemini Norway. He has over 5 years of experience with Java development as a developer and architect. When not working he is active within the agile community and has worked on several agile projects during the last years. He is convinced that we need to make process and technology match each other if we are to reach the goal of effective, good and sustainable system development.
Bent Are Melsom holds a Master of Science from NTNU, and works as a Managing Consultant at Capgemini Norway where he leads the java department. He has many years of experience with the java-platform, recently as an architect on two of the largest projects in Norway. He is a frequent spreaker at conferences, and a passionate developer and "hands-on" architect.

I work as a manager in BEKK, and have been working with Java technology for 10+ years. On projects I tend to take on roles as a team leader and/or developer. In BEKK I also work with knowledge management and have had various roles managing our technology groups. I spend the Spring 2009 semester at the Haas School of Business at UC Berkeley, where I followed a course on Managing Innovation and Change with Henry Chesbrough - one of the key proponents of Open Innovation.

Eugene is a systems high scalability and performance expert, and author of the first two commercial books about Google App Engine: Developing with Google App Engine (Python, Feb. 2009) and Beginning with Google App Engine (Java, Python, Aug. 2009) published internationally by Apress, USA. Eugene Ciurana CTO CIME Software Labs +1 415 387 3800

Niclas Hedhman has 25 years professional software experience, in anything from 192 byte embedded systems to complex enterprise systems. He is a Member of the Apache Software Foundation, where he has contributed to several projects. After getting increasingly frustrated with XML, RDBMSes, property files and "frameworks" that slow you down more than help you, Niclas and Rickard Öberg got together in 2007 to discuss ideas and as a result created the Qi4j project, set out to challenge the way we build business applications. He lives and enjoys life in tropical Malaysia.

Trygve Laugstøl jobber i Arktekk som utvikler, arkitekt og har mange års erfaring med Java-utvikling. Han har lang erfaring med utvikling og bruk av åpen kildekode som kjerneutvikler av Maven 2 og Continuum. Trygve har jobbet lenge med utvikling av plugins som støtter opp om smidig utvikling og som rådgiver innenfor disse områdene.
Kristian Nordal jobber til daglig hos Arktekk, som Java-utvikler med hovedfokus på open source og smidig utvikling. Han er commiter på Codehaus sitt prosjekt for Maven-plugins og har i flere år deltatt i utviklingen av Maven 2-plugins, som for eksempel den første pluginen for Jetty5 og appassembler-pluginen.

Klara Vatn jobber som senior interaksjonsdesigner og funksjonell rådgiver i BEKK. Hun er medlem av BEKKs faggruppe for samhandling og sosial programvare, Virksomhet 2.0 Klara har lang erfaring med smidig utvikling i prosjekter for større organisasjoners løsninger for selvbetjening og samhandling. Hennes bidrag er å finne hos bl.a. NAV, Posten Norge og Statens Vegvesen.

Simon Ritter is a Technology Evangelist at Sun Microsystems. Simon has been in the IT business since 1984 and holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Physics from Brunel University in the U.K. Originally working in the area of UNIX development for AT&T UNIX System Labs and then Novell, Simon moved to Sun in 1996. At this time he started working with Java technology and has spent time working both in Java technology development and consultancy. He now specialises in looking at emerging technologies including cloud computing, wireless sensor networks and gestural interfaces.

Espen Dalløkken have been working in the software development industry since 1998 working for companies such as Razorfish, Bekk Consulting and Fast, Search & Transfer. In addition he has been CTO of music start-up Ezmo and manager at Open AdExchange. Experience with Java and .Net platforms combined with years of experience with traditional web technologies and the Flex Framework gives him the perspective to see the best solutions regardless of technology. Espen is a follower of an agile approach to software development and a dedicated student of the art of Lean Software Development. http://dallokken.com/espen/

Erik, co-author of Lucene in Action and Java Development with Ant, is an experienced developer and accomplished speaker on many technical topics. Erik has taught Solr and Lucene at many ApacheCon conferences, and he's a former speaker on the No Fluff, Just stuff symposium circuit. He is a technical team member and co-founder of Lucid Imagination, a company dedicated to supporting the Lucene/Solr ecosystem.

Johannes is just a developer (but his business card reads "chief scientist" and his project plan gives him the august title "architect"). He's crafted code for ten years. When he started out, he wrote simplistic code. Then he learned to write elegant code. Now, he just tries to write simple code.
Finn-Robert has been working as a java developer for eight years and his working title is architect. His passion for developing software started when he got his first commodore 64 and he has been striving for good design since. He has fallen into many pitfalls, but feels he has learned from his mistakes.

Randy Stafford is a practicing software professional with 20 years’ experience as a developer, analyst, architect, manager, consultant, and author/presenter. Currently for Oracle’s middleware development A-Team, he engages globally for proof-of-concept projects, architecture reviews, and production crises with diverse customer organizations, specializing in grid, SOA, performance, HA, and JEE/ORM work. In past lives, Mr. Stafford has been Technical Advisor to agile vendor Rally Software, Chief Architect of SaaS company IQNavigator, Director of Development of SynXis Agent (acquired by Sabre), consultant for GemStone and Smalltalk, and a simulation specialist in the aerospace and CASE industries. Long active in the professional community, he was a contributor to Martin Fowler’s Patterns of Enterprise Application Architecture and Floyd Marinescu’s EJB Design Patterns, and a reviewer of other enterprise patterns books. He has presented at conferences of the Society for Computer Simulation, the International Council on Systems Engineering, the Agile Development Conference, and Oracle Open World, and he has participated heavily in online communities devoted to architecture and agile development. His professional interests include domain model persistence, enterprise application architecture, application performance management, requirements analysis and specification, software development process, organizational culture, and leadership of people. Mr. Stafford is motivated to improve the practice of software development and solve problems facing society. He lives in his native Denver, Colorado with his wife and family.

Nils Christian trives best når han kan hjelpe til med å skape applikasjoner som gleder både brukerne og sponsorene. Han har lang erfaring med smidig systemutvikling som programmerer, arkitekt, prosjektleder og coach, blant annet fra ThoughtWorks og som CTO i Know IT Objectnet. I dag jobber Nils Christian som selvstendig konsulent fra sitt eget firma, Wasteless AS. Han holder ofte foredrag og kurs for bedrifter og brukerforeninger og har presentert på mange konferanser både nasjonalt og internasjonalt. Nils Christian er også medforfatter av læreboken "Innføring i informasjonsteknologi".
Roy jobber som konsulent i Know IT Objectnet og har over 13 års erfaring innen systemutvikling. Java og J2EE har vært hans spesialområde de siste 10 årene, med spesielt fokus på web løsninger. I tillegg har han bred kompetanse innen databasemodellering og SQL programmering etter mange år i Sybase Norge as. I den senere tid har han bygd solid kompetanse på Ruby og Rails med deltagelse i fagarbeid og prosjekt for Know IT Objectnet.

Gunnar Velle er seniorkonsulent hos Know IT Objectnet og har vore ansatt der sidan 2001. I løpet av denne tida har han jobba med fleire virksomhetskritiske systemer, blandt annet for Statens Vegvesen, Norsk Hydro og siste åra NSB. Siden 2007 har han hatt ansvar for FriKomPort og har også tidligere hold foredrag om prosjektet og finansieringsmodellen.

Anders is a seasoned software developer and speaker. EJBs drove him to Microsoft .NET back in 2002. He made a name for himself in the .NET community using his Java-experiences to get a head start. Today he is a polyglot combining the best of all worlds to build better software. He has given talks on many conferences and user group meetings and is known for talks with few slides and lots of code. Anders lives in Norway where he works as the Chief Technology Evangelist for Objectware.

Svein-Magnus er sivilingeniør i kommunikasjonsteknologi fra NTNU, og er ansatt som forretningsanalytiker i avdelingen for Digital Forretningsutvikling hos Objectware AS. Hans primære faginteresser omfatter webteknologi, innovasjon, sosiale medier, informasjonsarkitektur og brukeropplevelser, og han har arbeidet med disse fagområdene siden 2006. Svein-Magnus skriver jevnlig om faglige emner i sin weblog på http://blog.menneske.org og på Twitter som @SveinMagnus.

CTO, Opera Software

Jon Bing er forfatter og jusprofessor ved Senter for rettsinformatikk ved Universitetet i Oslo. Han er også prisbelønt for sine bidrag som romanforfatter, dramatiker, forsker og regnes som en foregangsmann innenfor internasjonal rettsinformatikk og opphavsrett. Han har ledet og deltatt i utallige råd, tillitsverv og utvalg både nasjonalt og internasjonalt.

Works at Bouvet as a consultant. He is one of the founders and main architects behind the Ontopia Topic Maps software (now an open source project). He has been working with innovative and exciting technologies for many years and never stops looking for new ones to explore.

Jon-Anders Teigen er en Scala entusiast med interesse for programmeringsspråk generelt. Han er en av grunnleggerne av scalaBin (Scala brukergruppen i Norge) i tillegg til å være en aktiv medlem av javaBin. Om dagen jobber han som Javakonsulent i JPro, og om natten hacker han Scala :-)

Morten currently works a senior consultant for Miles AS. His has been an active developer since the early 90s developing financial applications using Cobol/Mainframes, Client-Server technology, Microsoft .NET and Java. Learning the hard way that complexity is always bad, he spends his time getting better at using Agile methods, lightweight architectures and Cloud Computing.

Fredrik Vraalsen is a Java developer/consultant at Know IT Objectnet, doing design and development on a large sales back-end system and client application for NSB. He is also a Scala enthusiast and co-founder of scalaBin as well as member of the JavaZone programme committee for the past two years. Fredrik received an M.Sc. degree from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign in 2001 and has over 10 years of experience as a software developer working with J2EE, Swing client applications and Java/C++ on mobile devices. After graduating he was as a researcher and developer at SINTEF for 5 years with a focus on software development methodology, mobile systems and model-based security analysis.
Alf Kristian is always eager to find better ways. He is very interested in lightweight development and has been a Scala enthusiast for more than a year. Alf Kristian is co-founder of scalaBin, the Norwegian Scala User Group, and he has been a member of the JavaZone programme committee for the past two years. Alf Kristian has more than 5 years of experience within software development and consulting, and he currently works for Know IT Objectnet AS.

Aslak Hellesøy is the Chief Scientist of BEKK, a Norwegian business and technology consulting firm. He has been programming Java since 1996 and Ruby since 2003 (plus half a dozen other languages). Aslak was one of the main contributors to the popular XDoclet project which influenced Java annotations. He is also the co-founder of PicoContainer, one of the first simple dependency injection containers for Java. Aslak is a vocal proponent of the process and tool aspects of Behaviour-Driven Development. He is the co-founder of the popular RSpec project for Ruby and the founder of the Cucumber project.

Scott W. Ambler is Chief Methodologist/Agile with IBM Software Group and he works with IBM customers around the world to improve their software processes. He is the founder of the Agile Modeling (AM), Agile Data (AD), Agile Unified Process (AUP), and Enterprise Unified Process (EUP) methodologies. Scott is the (co-)author of 19 books, including Refactoring Databases, Agile Modeling, Agile Database Techniques, The Object Primer 3rd Edition, and The Enterprise Unified Process. Scott is a senior contributing editor with Information Week. His personal home page is http://www.ibm.com/software/rational/leadership/leaders/#scott and his Agile at Scale blog is www.ibm.com/developerworks/blogs/page/ambler.

Ola Bini is a Swedish developer currently working for ThoughtWorks in Stockholm, Sweden. He is the creator of the language Ioke, and has been one of the core developers for JRuby since 2006. He is the author of the APress book Practical JRuby on Rails. He has much experience with Java, Ruby and LISP, and has been involved with several other open source projects. He has spoken at numerous conferences, including JavaOne, JavaZone, JavaPolis, QCon, JAOO, RailsConf, TheServerSide Java Symposium, JFokus, and many more

Björn Beskow is a senior consultant at Callista Enterprise, where he works with System Architecture, Technical Project Management, Test Automation and Mentoring. Björn has +15 years of experience working with industrial, military, finance and eCommerce systems. His specialty is architecture, modeling, design, test and build automation on the Java EE platform. He is also a software methodology mentor, and has led many courses in Java/J2EE, Web Development, Object Orientation, Requirements Modeling, Use Case Modeling, Test Methodology, Extreme Programming, Scrum and the Unified Process.

Bob Lee is a software engineer at Google. He created the Jolt award winning Guice framework. He currently leads the core library development on Android.

Kevlin Henney is an independent consultant based in the UK. He specialises in programming languages, OO design, patterns, development process and software architecture, helping teams adopt techniques and improve their software development through training, mentoring and reviewing. He is and has been a columnist for various magazines and web sites, including the Reg Developer channel of The Register, SearchSoftwareQuality.com and Better Software. He is also coauthor of two volumes in the Pattern-Oriented Software Architecture series, A Pattern Language for Distributed Computing and On Patterns and Pattern Languages.
Eric Evans, author of Domain-driven Design: Tackling Complexity in the Heart of Software, is a thought leader in software design, domain driven design and domain modeling and particularly focuses on strategic design.
Einar Landre is a practicing software professional with 25 years’ experience as a developer, architect, manager, consultant, and author/presenter. Currently for StatoilHydro's Business Application Services, he engages in business critical application development, architecture reviews and software process improvement activities, specializing in SOA, Domain Driven Design, use of Multi-Agents and design of large scale networked software intensive systems. Before joining StatoilHydro, Mr. Landre has been consultant and department manager with Norwegian Bouvet, Development manager of TeamWide, technical adviser with Skrivervik Data (SUN & CISCO distributor) and finally software developer with Norsk Data where he implemented communication protocols, operating systems and test software for the space station. Over the last years Mr. Landre has become an active member of the professional community, where he has been author and coauthor of several papers presented at OOPSLA and SPE. He has presented at several international conferences in Europe and the US. His professional interests include object oriented programming, enterprise application architecture, multi-agents, autonomous systems design, requirements analysis and specification, use of systems engineering practices, agile methodologies and leadership in high-tech organizations. He is a member of the ACM and the IEEE Computer Society, as well as the SPE (Society Petroleum Engineers). Mr. Landre holds a MSc in Information Technology from the University of Strathclyde, is an IEEE certified software development professional (CSDP) and lives with his family in Stavanger, Norway.
Scott Davis is an internationally recognized author and speaker. He is passionate about open source solutions and agile development. He has worked on a variety of Java platforms, from J2EE to J2SE to J2ME (sometimes all on the same project). Scott's books include Groovy Recipes: Greasing the Wheels of Java, GIS for Web Developers: Adding Where to Your Web Applications, The Google Maps API, and JBoss At Work. Scott is the Editor in Chief of aboutGroovy.com, a news and information website that tracks the latest developments in Groovy and Grails. He also writes a regular column for IBM DeveloperWorks -- Mastering Grails. Scott is a frequent presenter at national conferences (such as No Fluff, Just Stuff) and local user groups. He was the president of the Denver Java Users Group in 2003 when it was voted one of the top-ten JUGs in North America. After a quick move north, he is currently active in the leadership of the Boulder Java Users Group. Keep up with him at http://www.davisworld.org.
Phil Wills spent his university career studying Physics, but having realised he probably wasn't going to be an astronaut, opted for the next best thing: a career in software development for the web. Phil has experience with a broad range of languages and technologies, but has spent the past three years focusing on redeveloping guardian.co.uk with a focus on building a strong domain model and achieving high performance.
Greg Young is an independent consultant who resides in two suitcases (literally!). At the moment of writing he is residing in Montreal, Quebec but loves to travel and may be in a city near you soon. In his spare time you can find Greg on the alt.net list, speaking at conferences or user groups, or floating upside down through rapids in his kayak.
Randy Stafford is a practicing software professional with 20 years’ experience as a developer, analyst, architect, manager, consultant, and author/presenter. Currently for Oracle’s middleware development A-Team, he engages globally for proof-of-concept projects, architecture reviews, and production crises with diverse customer organizations, specializing in grid, SOA, performance, HA, and JEE/ORM work. In past lives, Mr. Stafford has been Technical Advisor to agile vendor Rally Software, Chief Architect of SaaS company IQNavigator, Director of Development of SynXis Agent (acquired by Sabre), consultant for GemStone and Smalltalk, and a simulation specialist in the aerospace and CASE industries. Long active in the professional community, he was a contributor to Martin Fowler’s Patterns of Enterprise Application Architecture and Floyd Marinescu’s EJB Design Patterns, and a reviewer of other enterprise patterns books. He has presented at conferences of the Society for Computer Simulation, the International Council on Systems Engineering, the Agile Development Conference, and Oracle Open World, and he has participated heavily in online communities devoted to architecture and agile development. His professional interests include domain model persistence, enterprise application architecture, application performance management, requirements analysis and specification, software development process, organizational culture, and leadership of people. Mr. Stafford is motivated to improve the practice of software development and solve problems facing society. He lives in his native Denver, Colorado with his wife and family.

Stig Lau has worked as a developer of enterpricy applications and consultant since 2004, and is currently employed by Bouvet. He invents problems and solves them with new technology.

Trond Arve Wasskog er utvikler og CTO i Bekk Consulting. Han har jobbet med Java og Java EE applikasjonsutvikling i mer enn ti år, med fokus på smidig utvikling, kvalitet og vedlikeholdbarhet.

Fredrik Vraalsen is a Java developer/consultant at Know IT Objectnet, doing design and development on a large sales back-end system and client application for NSB. He is also a Scala enthusiast and co-founder of scalaBin as well as member of the JavaZone programme committee for the past two years. Fredrik received an M.Sc. degree from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign in 2001 and has over 10 years of experience as a software developer working with J2EE, Swing client applications and Java/C++ on mobile devices. After graduating he was as a researcher and developer at SINTEF for 5 years with a focus on software development methodology, mobile systems and model-based security analysis.
Jon Marius Håkedal er utdannet Sivilingeniør fra NTNU (2004) og har siden 2005 jobbet som utvilker/konsulent for Know IT Objectnet. Han har vært med på å utvikle både klient- og serverside løsninger, og har erfaring med en bråte forskjellige teknologier. For tiden jobber han med en av norges største selvbetjeningsløsninger for bedriftsmarkedet.

Per Spilling is a developer/architect/process mentor with 21 years experience in working with object technology (C++, Ada, Python, Actor, Concurrent C++, CORBA, Java). He is currently working as a principal consultant at Objectware in Oslo. His main work related interests are lightweight architectures, software craftsmanship, DDD, agile methods and agile development tools. Per has been a member of the JavaZone program committee for the last 5 years.

Jevgeni Kabanov is the founder and lead of ZeroTurnaround (www.zeroturnaround.com), a development tools company that focuses on productivity. Before that he worked as the R&D director of Webmedia, Ltd, the largest custom software development company in the Baltics. As part of the effort to reduce development time tunraround he wrote the prototype of the ZeroTurnaround flagship product, JavaRebel, a class reloading JVM plugin. Jevgeni has been speaking at international conferences for several years, including JavaPolis/Devoxx, JavaZone, JAOO and so on. He also has an active research interest, publishing several papers on topics ranging from category theoretical notions to typesafe Java DSLs. Besides the commercial products made for ZeroTurnaround, Jevgeni is a co-founder of two open-source projects -- Aranea and Squill. Aranea (www.araneaframework.org) is a web development and integration platform based on strong object-oriented principles. Squill (squill.dev.java.net) is a typesafe internal DSL for constructing and executing SQL queries. Jevgeni's personal blog can be found at dow.ngra.de.

Dr Heinz Kabutz is best known for his creation of The Java Specialists' Newsletter, read in 120 countries by 50000 Java experts. In his newsletter, he examines advanced aspects of Java that have helped Java developers around the world to produce better code. As someone remarked on the Sun website: "Heinz Kabutz is a hero in the Java Developer Community. His newsletters have saved companies millions by helping burgeoning and experienced programmers deliver high quality products." In order to fund the newsletter, Heinz writes Java code on contract and runs seminars. His latest creation, the Java Specialist Master Course, examines ten areas of advanced Java. It is one of the only courses specifically aimed at the seasoned Java professional. Heinz was invited to speak at several Sun Tech Days events: Johannesburg 2006, Athens 2007, London 2007 and Frankfurt 2007. He is a regular speaker at Java User Groups such as JavaPolis, JavaZone, JFall and JHUG. In addition, he has spoken several times at the Server Side conferences in USA and Europe. Heinz was interviewed on the Sun Website (http://java.sun.com/developer/technicalArticles/Interviews/community/kabutz_qa.html)

As co-founder and Chief Executive Officer of Kaazing Corporation, Jonas Jacobi sets the company's business strategy and oversees all aspects of Kaazing's operations and mission to become the world-wide leader in real-time software. A native of Sweden, he has worked in the software industry for more than sixteen years. Before starting Kaazing, Jonas worked as VP of Product Management responsible for the product management and marketing strategy for Brane Corporation, a startup company in Silicon Valley. Prior to his appointment as vice president for Brane, he worked 8 years for Oracle as a Java EE and open source evangelist, and product manager responsible for the product management of JavaServer Faces and Oracle ADF Faces (now Apache Trinidad) in the Oracle JDeveloper team. Jonas is a frequent speaker at international conferences and has written numerous articles for leading IT magazines such as Java Developer's Journal, JavaPro, AjaxWorld, and Oracle Magazine. Jonas is co-author of the book, Pro JSF and Ajax: Building Rich Internet Components (Apress).
John Fallows is a pioneer in the field of rich and highly interactive user interfaces and co-founder and CTO of Kaazing Corporation. He recently worked as Architect at Brane Corporation, a startup company based in Redwood City, California. Originally from Norther Ireland, John graduated from Cambridge University in the United Kingdom and has worked in the software industry for more than ten years. Prior to joining Brane, John was a Consulting Member of Technical Staff for Server Technologies at Oracle Corporation. During his last 5 years at Oracle, John focused on designing, developing, and evolving Oracle ADF Faces to fully integrate Ajax technologies. John is an active participant in the standards bodies working on defining the WebSockets standards. He is also a popular speaker at international conferences and has written numerous articles for leading IT magazines such as Java Developer's Journal, AjaxWorld Magazine, and JavaMagazine (DE). John is co-author of the recently published book Pro JSF and Ajax: Building Rich Internet Components, (Apress).

System developer at Escenic AS. He is the lead developer and architect behind the open source HTTP-cache client library HTTPCache4j.

Jonas Bonér is a programmer, mentor, speaker and author who spends most of his time consulting as well as lecturing and speaking at developer conferences world-wide. He has worked at Terracotta, the JRockit JVM at BEA and is an active contributor to the Open Source community; most notably created the AspectWerkz (AOP) framework, committer to the Terracotta JVM clustering technology and been part of the Eclipse AspectJ team. Read more on his blog: http://jonasboner.com

Vidar Kongsli works as a developer and architect at Bekk Consulting AS. He has a long experience developing enterprise solutions based on Microsoft .NET, Java, and Lotus Domino. Additionally, he is currently focusing on agile development, (automated) testing, and quality assurance.

Holger har vært konsulent i Accenture i 10 år og har lang erfaring som teknisk arkitekt på utviklingsprosjekter basert på Java. Han er nordisk leder for Accentures ”Execution Architecture” faggruppe som fokuserer på kjøretidsarkitektur for skreddersømsapplikasjoner. Han er nå sjefsarkitekt på et av Norges største IT-prosjekter hvor han har vært med å etablere en ny SOA-arkitektur og implementere en forretningskritisk applikasjon på denne arkitekturen.

Nick Sieger is an engineer at Engine Yard, working on JRuby and leading the effort to make the Java Virtual Machine a robust yet easy-to-use deployment platform for Rails and Ruby web applications. He created and co-maintains the JDBC adapter for ActiveRecord that JRuby on Rails uses for database connectivity, as well as the Warbler tool and JRuby-Rack library for dealing with Java application server deployment. He maintains a blog on Ruby and JRuby-related topics at http://blog.nicksieger.com/.

Eirik Torske er utvikler hos BBS og har over 10 år i Java-land.

Anders is a seasoned software developer and speaker. EJBs drove him to Microsoft .NET back in 2002. He made a name for himself in the .NET community using his Java-experiences to get a head start. Today he is a polyglot combining the best of all worlds to build better software. He has given talks on many conferences and user group meetings and is known for talks with few slides and lots of code. Anders lives in Norway where he works as the Chief Technology Evangelist for Objectware.

Vegard Hartmann er fagleder for Kvalitet og testing i Bekk Consulting. Han har siden 2005 jobbet både med nyutvikling og forvaltning av en rekke applikasjoner.

Kevlin Henney is an independent consultant based in the UK. He specialises in programming languages, OO design, patterns, development process and software architecture, helping teams adopt techniques and improve their software development through training, mentoring and reviewing. He is and has been a columnist for various magazines and web sites, including the Reg Developer channel of The Register, SearchSoftwareQuality.com and Better Software. He is also coauthor of two volumes in the Pattern-Oriented Software Architecture series, A Pattern Language for Distributed Computing and On Patterns and Pattern Languages.

Bob Lee created the Jolt-award-winning Google Guice framework and now leads JSR-330 (Dependency Injection for Java). He represents Google on the JCP Executive Committee. Bob is also involved with JSR-166 (java.util.concurrent), Project Coin (small language changes), and JSR-294 (Java Modules).

Andreas Øverland is a Manager at BEKK Consulting. He has been working with Java and web development for 13-14 years. Now he has the position of web developer, focusing on client side technologies and user interaction in complex web applications. Pushing pixels, programming some java, ajaxing up and down, JSONing around, making nice colors in CSS and some good old HTML-coding using web standards for good accessibility, make up the most of his working days.

Chris Richardson is a developer, architect and mentor with over 20 years of experience and is the author of the book "POJOs in Action." He runs a consulting and training company that helps customers reduce the cost of development and increase the effectiveness of their development teams. His technical interests include domain-driven design, cloud computing and developer testing. Chris has been a technical leader at a variety of companies including Insignia Solutions and BEA Systems and recently became a Java Champion. Chris is the founder of Cloud Tools, which is an open-source project for quickly and easily deploying Java applications on Amazon EC2, and of Cloud Foundry, which provides outsourced, automated data center management. He has spoken at various conferences including JavaOne 2006/2007/2008, No Fluff Just Stuff Java Symposiums, Colorado Software Summit, SD West, The Spring Experience, SpringOne, and Javapolis as well as Java user groups. Chris holds a computer science degree from the Cambridge University in England and lives in Oakland, CA where he runs the local Java User Group. Website and blog: http://chrisrichardson.net/

Tor Magne Lindeberg and Irene Blesvik both work as integration architects at ErgoGroup AS, one of the largest Norwegian software companies offering operations, solutions and consultancy services. They are part of the company's Java technology group. They studied together at NTNU and have 5 years experience in the software industry. They have been working with various technologies and environments, including J2EE/JEE, but primarily focused on integration.
Tor Magne Lindeberg and Irene Blesvik both work as integration architects at ErgoGroup AS, one of the largest Norwegian software companies offering operations, solutions and consultancy services. They are part of the company's Java technology group. They studied together at NTNU and have 5 years experience in the software industry. They have been working with various technologies and environments, including J2EE/JEE, but primarily focused on integration.

Markus Krüger is a Sun Certified Enterprise Architect developing enterprise systems at ErgoGroup AS, one of the largest Norwegian software companies offering operations, solutions, and consultancy services. He is part of the company's Java technology group. Markus has 10 years experience in the software industry, working with various technologies and environments, including J2EE/JEE the last 7 years. Other experiences includes work on search engine technology at FAST, browser video plugins at GridMedia, and e-mail security and notary services at eNotarius. He has previously held talks, both internally and to open audiences, on various subjects such as CVS, Hibernate, and performance testing.

Harald is working as technical architect with Computas AS, on a 5-year-long java-project with 25 developers. He's responsible for the build system, infrastructure for development and testing, and adapting new designs into the existing architecture. He's quite ambivalent to the idea of Maven, but tries to praise the possibilities istead of weep over the weaknesses, and finally shorten the turnaround, to achive a truly agile development situation.

Anders Sandvig is a self-taught hacker and pragmatic programmer with experience from many areas, including computer games, real-time graphics, interactive television, telecommunications, enterprise systems, desktop applications and web development. During the past two decades he has used a wide variety of programming languages, ranging from low-level assembly to high-level scripting. Anders has been a professional programmer for over ten years, is certified ScrumMaster and practitioner of agile development principles. He now works as a senior consultant for Webstep.

Janniche har 5 års erfaring med utvikling av mer eller mindre domenedrevne Java applikasjoner. Hun er for tiden fagleder for Java i Bekk og har høy fokus på utvikling av god Java kode. Favoritt sitat: "Expert programmers are those who write code even idiot programmers can understand. Idiot programmers are those who write code not even expert programmers can understand."

Tidligere jobbet som systemutvikler, prosjektleder og prosessforbedringsleder i Telenor og Storebrand. Professor ved Simula Research Laboratory og Universitetet i Oslo.

Karianne har en mastergrad i IKT fra Universitetet i Bergen, og er ansatt som konsulent i Javaavdelingen i Objectware. Hennes hovedinteresser er patterns, smidig utvikling og Spring Framework, som hun har jobbet med siden 2005. Karianne er svært aktiv i fagmiljøet, og er medarrangør av konferansene ROOTS og Smidig, samt Oslo XP Meetup.

Stig Murberg has been working at TANDBERG for the last 4 years. He works as a team lead and software developer, and his main focus and interests are in the area of Web development.
Ragnvald Barth is a highly experienced Java and .Net developer. He has been working for TANDBERG the past 3 years on a wide array of projects.

Hågen jobber som konsulent hos Know IT Objectnet og har kompetanse på en rekke av dagens mest moderne buzzwords. Som ung var han en ivrig deltager i nulløp i det lokale idrettslaget, og han vil gjerne bringe det gode budskap om nulløpets fortreffelighet til de store masser.
Jan Eivind jobber som seniorkonsulent hos Know IT Objectnet. Han har 15 års erfaring med ulike teknologier, og har de siste 8 årene jobbet som arkitekt og utvikler i prosjekter med Java som plattform. Dette har gitt han bred erfaring innen J2EE (EJB2.0/3.0, JSP, WebServices), Spring, Hibernate, JPA og Swing.

Kjetil Kristiansen er utdannet siv.ing fra NTNU, og er Senior Technology Architect i Accenture. Han har over 10 års erfaring fra større utviklingsprosjekter basert på Java, hovedsaklig som teknisk arkitekt/teknisk prosjektleder. Kjetil har de siste årene vært leder for applikasjonsarkitekturgruppen i NAV Pensjonsprosjektet, et av de største IT-prosjektene som har vært gjennomført i Norge, hvor han har vært ansvarlig for å etablere og vedlikeholde Java arkitekturen i prosjektet.

Mario is an experienced developer and architect currently working with SOA, integration and IT-architecture at CIBER Norway. Ciber is an acknowledged consulting company, delivering mission critical solutions with strong focus on Java, and related technologies. Mario holds a Master of Computer Science from Norwegian University of Science and Technology. His main interests are SOA Governance, Enterprice Architecture, Scrum and software development on the Java platform.

Cameron Purdy is Vice President of Development at Oracle. Prior to joining Oracle, Mr. Purdy was the CEO of Tangosol, whose revolutionary Coherence Data Grid product provides reliable and scalable data management across the enterprise. Mr. Purdy has over ten years of experience with Javaô and Java-related technology. As a software visionary and industry leader, Mr. Purdy is a frequent presenter at industry conferences and has received a number of awards in recognition of his contribution to the Java community, including twice being named as a JavaOne RockStar and being recognized in TheServerSideís ìWhoís Who in Enterprise Javaî. He regularly participates in industry standards development and is a specification lead for the Java Community Process.

Simon Ritter is a Technology Evangelist at Sun Microsystems. Simon has been in the IT business since 1984 and holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Physics from Brunel University in the U.K. Originally working in the area of UNIX development for AT&T UNIX System Labs and then Novell, Simon moved to Sun in 1996. At this time he started working with Java technology and has spent time working both in Java technology development and consultancy. He now specialises in looking at emerging technologies including cloud computing, wireless sensor networks and gestural interfaces.

Eirik Bjørsnøs jobber som Chief Scientist hos Kantega i Trondheim. Der prøver han å finne teknologier og teknikker som kan hjelpe Kantegas utviklere til å jobbe bedre. Når han ikke jobber for Kantega utvikler Eirik SVNSearch, et endringsanalyseverktøy for versjonskontroll. Eirik har tidligere holdt foredrag på JavaZone og Smidig.

Stefan Magnus Landrø works as a manager at Bekk Consulting, and spends his free time playing around with open source libraries and in particular the ruby on rails framework.

Einar Landre is a practicing software professional with 25 years’ experience as a developer, architect, manager, consultant, and author/presenter. Currently for StatoilHydro's Business Application Services, he engages in business critical application development, architecture reviews and software process improvement activities, specializing in SOA, Domain Driven Design, use of Multi-Agents and design of large scale networked software intensive systems. Before joining StatoilHydro, Mr. Landre has been consultant and department manager with Norwegian Bouvet, Development manager of TeamWide, technical adviser with Skrivervik Data (SUN & CISCO distributor) and finally software developer with Norsk Data where he implemented communication protocols, operating systems and test software for the space station. Over the last years Mr. Landre has become an active member of the professional community, where he has been author and coauthor of several papers presented at OOPSLA and SPE. He has presented at several international conferences in Europe and the US. His professional interests include object oriented programming, enterprise application architecture, multi-agents, autonomous systems design, requirements analysis and specification, use of systems engineering practices, agile methodologies and leadership in high-tech organizations. He is a member of the ACM and the IEEE Computer Society, as well as the SPE (Society Petroleum Engineers). Mr. Landre holds a MSc in Information Technology from the University of Strathclyde, is an IEEE certified software development professional (CSDP) and lives with his family in Stavanger, Norway.

"Tom Gilb is a freelance consultant, teacher and author serving clients mainly in Europe and the US. He has 3 books in print: “Competitive Engineering” (2005, one chapter on SQC), “Principles of Software Engineering Management” (chapters on Inspection, 1988 !, 20th printing) and “Software Inspection” (1993, Japanese translation). Tom Gilb specializes in software engineering, systems engineering, and technical management. He resides in Oslo and London. His most recent papers, book manuscripts, and slides are available on www.gilb.com Tom was an early professional colleague, supporter, and inspection-pupil (1974-5) of Michael Fagan (Tom wrote over 80 pages about Inspection in his 1976 Software metrics book), and a consultant to Ron Radice (1980, inventor of CMM and co-inventor with Fagan of Inspection, author of "High Quality Low Cost Software Inspections"), and Tom was the first to preach and teach inspections outside of IBM, in Norway and many other countries. He developed his own version of Software Inspection (about 400 process changes compared to Fagan's version) and documented this (with co-author Dorothy Graham) in the worlds first published book on Inspection (Software Inspection 1993, now in 14th printing). The book also includes 2 chapters on the Defect Prevention Process (aka CMMI Level 5) and many guest chapter case studies. By 2003 he had developed and practiced an Agile version Inspection, renaming it Agile Specification Quality Control (SQC). In September 2008 he and Kai were invited by JUSE (Japanese Union of Scientists and Engineers) to Keynote their annual software conference on Inspections, and to present a one day tutorial on the subject. They also were invited to work with Hitachi Software, and Sony Corporation. Sony is currently spreading the Agile SQC within Sony and to many other Japanese Corporations. In 1989-90 Tom successfully spread the method to aircraft engineering design at Douglas and Boeing, with large scale adoption and detailed study and proof of effectiveness. From 1988 Tom and Kai spread his Inspection method to Hewlett Packard HP Corporate and worldwide, with well-documented savings in books and papers by HP (Robert Grady).
Kai works in partnership with Tom, teaching, running workshops, consulting, starting up projects, saving projects, solving problems, lecturing, writing books and articles, course & lecture materials etc. Kai has been teaching and helping clients practice Inspections and Agile Inspections since about 1990, at major organizations like Ericsson, Nokia HP, and Citigroup (2003) - where he co-invented, with Tom, the current formal process "Agile Inspections", with Tom. Our initial client proved on many projects, a reduction of bugs 8 to 1 in 6 months. He most recently co-taught in Japan at JUSE, Sony and Hitachi, and for a few other corporations such as IBM.

Jeff Genender is a Java Open Source consultant specializing in SOA and enterprise service implementations. He is the author of Professional Apache Tomcat 6, Professional Apache Geronimo, and Enterprise Java Servlets, as well as an Apache member and committer on several projects including ServiceMix, CXF, Geronimo, OpenEJB, ServiceMix, Mina, and Open Terracotta. Jeff serves on JSR-316 Java EE6 expert group committee.

Kristian Berg er utdannet ved Høgskolen i Bergen og jobber som utvikler for InteliNet AS. Han har mer enn ti års erfaring med utvikling av network management løsninger for telekom industrien. Det siste året har han jobbet med å utvikle styring og overvåking av telekom-systemer på embedded plattform.

Kaare Nilsen jobber til daglig som sjefskonsulent i Arktekk AS som utvikler og teknisk arkitekt. Han har over 10 års erfaring som programmerer og har lenge fokusert på åpen kildekode produkter, samt lettvekts-arkitektur og containere. Kaare er en velkjent foredragsholder innen mange Java og åpen kildekode emner, og er et aktivt medlem i miljøet rundt Maven.

Jon Grov is a Manager in Bekk Consulting. He has more than 10 years experience working with enterprise systems and open-source software, both as developer and manager. From 2004 to 2007, Jon was employed as researcher and lecturer by the Department of Informatics, University of Oslo. His work focused on scalability, data replication and transaction processing. In 2006, he worked on the EU-funded project GORDA as visiting researcher at the Distributed Systems Group in the University of Minho, Portugal. The goal of this project was to characterize and improve existing solutions for transaction processing in replicated databases.

Utvilker som liker å holde meg oppdatert innen nye språk, teknikker og utviklings metodikker. Hatt fulgt scala miljøet i 1.5 år. Har utvikler applikasjoner i lift blandt annet scala.java.no. Har også i den siste tiden begynt å bruke git til personlige prosjekter. Bloggen min er blandt annet på github pages.

Systems developer at Escenic AS. He has worked at Escenic for two years and has worked with both RESTful server and client applications. His technical interests revolve around HTTP, REST, Dependency Injection, database abstractions, Swing, Java and Scala. In his spare time he is a member of the the JavaZone conference program comitee and he is also the lead developer and architect behind the open source HTTP-cache library HTTPCache4j.
Chief Architect at Escenic AS. He has worked at Escenic for nine years and has worked with the server and client software all this time. He introduced REST to the company in 2004 and has designed most of the company's RESTful applications.

Kristoffer Moum er sjefskonsulent i Arktekk og jobber som utvikler, kursholder, scrum-master og teknisk arkitekt. Han har åtte års erfaring med utvikling av Java-løsninger. I tilegg har han ramlet innom stort sett det som finnes av produkter for kontinuerlig bygging og vet hva som virker. Kristoffer arbeider for tiden i et prosjekt hvis produkt shippes ferdig kjørbart nærmest per commit av kildekode.

Alex Boisvert is a committer and project management chair of Apache Buildr. He develops regularly in Java, Scala, Ruby and Groovy and is a polyglot programming enthusiast. He uses Buildr on a daily basis and has successfully applied it in several settings ranging from hobby and open-source projects to proprietary and enterprise-scale builds.

Jevgeni Kabanov is the founder and lead of ZeroTurnaround (www.zeroturnaround.com), a development tools company that focuses on productivity. Before that he worked as the R&D director of Webmedia, Ltd, the largest custom software development company in the Baltics. As part of the effort to reduce development time tunraround he wrote the prototype of the ZeroTurnaround flagship product, JavaRebel, a class reloading JVM plugin. Jevgeni has been speaking at international conferences for several years, including JavaPolis/Devoxx, JavaZone, JAOO and so on. He also has an active research interest, publishing several papers on topics ranging from category theoretical notions to typesafe Java DSLs. Besides the commercial products made for ZeroTurnaround, Jevgeni is a co-founder of two open-source projects -- Aranea and Squill. Aranea (www.araneaframework.org) is a web development and integration platform based on strong object-oriented principles. Squill (squill.dev.java.net) is a typesafe internal DSL for constructing and executing SQL queries. Jevgeni's personal blog can be found at dow.ngra.de.

Costin is a senior software engineer at SpringSource, VMware. His interests include data access and aspect oriented programming. With significant development experience, Costin is involved in the development of Spring framework, Pitchfork, Spring Modules and Spring JavaConfig. Leads Spring Dynamic Modules (Spring OSGi) project and the Spring-inspired, OSGi 4.2 Blueprint Service RI. Speaker at various editions of EclipseCon/OSGi DevCon, Javapolis, JavaZone, SpringOne, SpringOne2GX, TSSJS, TSE on Java/Spring/OSGi related topics.

Developer and architect with an interest in the opportunities and challenges given by PaaS and Mobile clients. This interest being sparked by work on an iphone app with a Google App engine backend.

Konstituert direktør Friprogsenteret.
- Jurist, jobbet i politiet siden 1997 - 12/13 års tung(!) erfaring med organisert kriminalitet og utradisjonelle metoder - Bakgrunn som politijurist, statsadvokat, etterforskningsleder, teamleder i spesialenheten Catch - Er i dag seksjonsleder på Kripos (dvs leder for alle etterforskerne på Kripos), har ansvar for prioriteringer og veivalg i alvorlige straffesaker. - Har hatt prinsippsaker om politiets "metoder" i Høyesterett, har deltatt i høringer, underviser på PHS og har holdt mange foredrag om emnet, har skrevet Master og har levert PhD-skisse vedr Orgkrim (Handelshøjskolen i København, CBS). - Deltatt i DLD debatten de siste månedene.
- Politioverbetjent på Kripos. - Ble nylig tilsatt som taktisk etterforskningsleder på Orgkrim, hvilket innebærer at han har det daglige, taktiske ansvaret for ledelsen av store Orgkrimsaker som Kripos etterforsker. - Har lang erfaring med utradisjonelle etterforskningsmetoder (fra saker), og har også hatt utradisjonelle metoder som et særlig ansvarsområde på Kripos. - Har hatt en sentral rolle ifm høringssvaret til Kripos. - Har mye praktisk erfaring med KK, romavlytting og andre tilsvarende metoder som inngår i DLD-diskusjonen.
Torgeir Waterhouse begynte i IKT-Norge i mars 2008 og jobber som prosjektleder. Torgeir kommer fra Forbrukerrådet hvor han har vært ansvarlig for IKT og Media.
Martin har en høyere IT-utdannelse fra NITH og har arbeidet i IT-bransjen siden 1999, både i Norge og internasjonalt, hvor han har arbeidet med strategiske, virksomhetskritiske IT-løsninger. For tiden arbeider Martin som utviklingsleder ved Friprogsenteret, hvor han har det overordnede informasjonsansvaret.

Eivind er faggruppeleder for Java-gruppen i BEKK, og har over 10 års erfaring som konsulent på Java- og JEE-relaterte prosjekter. Det siste året har han skrevet en masteroppgave ved universitetet i Oslo, med fokus på domene-spesifikke språk på JVM og hvilke muligheter ulike programmeringsspråk tilbyr. Eivind har holdt presentasjoner på JavaZone i mange år.

Ken Sipe is a Technology Director with Perficient, Inc. (PRFT) in St. Louis, MO, USA, where he leads multiple teams in the development of enterprise solutions on both the Java and .Net platforms. Ken was the founder of CodeMentor, where he was the Chief Architect and Mentor, leading clients in the execution of RUP and Agile methodologies in the delivery of software solutions. Ken is passionate about technology and regular speaks on topics of architecture and software development. He is a core speaker with NFJS and won the Rock Star award in 2009 at JavaOne, JavaZone and The Strange Loop.

Václav is a programming enthusiast who's constantly seeking ways to make development more effective and enjoyable. He's particularly interested in server-side Java technologies, distributed systems, parallel programming, agile methodologies, modern programming languages, DSLs and of course IntelliJ IDEA. He works for JetBrains as a senior software developer and a technology evangelist. On the side, he's leading the GPars project (http://gpars.codehaus.org), an opensource concurrency library, investigates the domains of neural networks, evolutionary programming and data mining. Blogging at http://www.jroller.com/vaclav

Ken Sipe is a Technology Director with Perficient, Inc. (PRFT) in St. Louis, MO, USA, where he leads multiple teams in the development of enterprise solutions on both the Java and .Net platforms. Ken was the founder of CodeMentor, where he was the Chief Architect and Mentor, leading clients in the execution of RUP and Agile methodologies in the delivery of software solutions. Ken is passionate about technology and regular speaks on topics of architecture and software development. He is a core speaker with NFJS and won the Rock Star award in 2009 at JavaOne, JavaZone and The Strange Loop.

Thomas E. Bjørge er utdannet siv.ing fra NTNU, og jobber som utvikler i Sirius IT, hvor han også er ansvarlig for fagområdet java. Han er spesielt interessert i enterprise Java utvikling og smidige utviklingsmetoder. Thomas har 5 års erfaring fra utviklingsprosjekter i offentlig sektor og har jobbet 3 år som utvikler av virksomhetskritiske batcher og tjenester på Sirius IT sin del av Pensjonprogrammet i NAV.

Anders Sveen works as a technology lead for Java at Capgemini Norway. He has over 5 years experience as a developer and architect with custom software solutions in Java. He has been working with agile development for four of those years. In his carreer he has had different roles ranging from developer to Scrum master, and he is always working to improve how technology and process interact to maximise the potential of an agile process.

26 year old Norwegian developer with experience both from Java and .Net with a passion for electronics.

Eugene Ciurana is an open source evangelist who specializes in the design and implementation of mission-critical, high-availability large scale systems. In the last two years, he and his team designed and built several 100% SOA and cloud systems for various Forbes top 25 companies globally. As chief liaison between Walmart.com Global and the ISD Technology Council, he led the official adoption of Linux and other open source technologies at Walmart Stores Information Systems Division. He continues to design high performance systems for major companies in the United States, Europe, and Japan. Publications: Developing with Google App Engine, Apress, ISBN 978-1-4302-1831-9; The Tesla Testament, CIMEntertainment, ISBN 978 1-4116-7317-5; Scalability & High Availability Refcard, DZone, ISBN 979-1-934238-46-2; SOA Patterns, DZone, ISBN 978-1-934238-33-2; under development: NoSQL Databases for the Enterprise (book); NoSQL Refcard, DZone, ISBN pending

Trond Marius jobber som seniorkonsulent i Mesan. Han har jobbet som Scrummaster, teamleder og teknisk arkitekt i flere prosjekter bl.a hos Forskningsrådet. Han er opptatt av å lage gode løsninger som oppfyller behovene til brukerne og bruker helst ny og moderne teknologi for å gjøre dette. Trond Marius er medlem i programkomiteen i JavaZone.

Nathaniel T. Schutta is a senior software engineer focussed on making usable applications. A proponent of polyglot programming, Nate has written two books on Ajax and speaks regularly at various No Fluff Just Stuff symposia, universities, and Java user groups. In addition to his day job, Nate is an adjunct professor at the University of Minnesota where he teaches students to embrace dynamic languages.

Haakon Gjersvik Eriksen works a software developer at TANDBERG. Most of his current job revolves around GUI programming and test development in Java. In a previous life he was a grumpy old Unix sysadmin.

Justin has been an active Java developer since 1996. He has worked on projects ranging from web applications to systems integration. For the last 2 years, he has been a member of the GlassFish and Grizzly teams. He is an active member of the open source community and local user groups. An author and occasional speaker, he continues to blog at http://antwerkz.com.

Rune Wiik har jobbet applikasjonsarkitektur i 20 år og med SOA de siste 5 årene. Han har holdt en rekke foredrag innenfor område siden 2004. Rune har jobbet med innføring av SOA og SOA governance hos blant annet Posten Norge og Statens Vegvesen.

Greg Young is an independent consultant who lives in two suitcases (literally). When not travelling around working for clients throughout the world you can often find him on the domain driven design list, blogging at codebetter.com, or floating upside down in a kayak through rapids. At the moment Greg is working on starting up a data provisioning and algorithmic trading company in South Africa.

Henning Spjelkavik is one of the chief architects behind Skiinfo.com and the map solution at FINN.no. He has 10 years of server side experience with java, and enjoys reading and testing new methods and methodologies, and analysing problems. You might have met him at JavaZone or Smidig talking about maps, lean, systems thinking or character encoding problems.

Espen Dalløkken have been working in the software development industry since 1998 working for companies such as Razorfish, Bekk Consulting and Fast. In addition he has been CTO of music start-up Ezmo and manager at Open AdExchange. Experience with Java and .Net platforms combined with years of experience with web technologies. Espen is a follower of an agile approach to software development and a dedicated student of the art of Lean Software Development. He also cut's his own hair and showers regularly. http://dallokken.com/espen/

Kohsuke Kawaguchi is a creator of Hudson at Oracle, and has involved in a number of projects such as JAXB, Metro, and GlassFish v3. He also hosts many projects on java.net, such as args4j, and com4j. More information on him can be found at http://www.kohsuke.org/.

Kaare Nilsen jobber til daglig som sjefskonsulent i Arktekk AS som utvikler og teknisk arkitekt. Han har over 15 års erfaring som programmerer og har lenge fokusert på åpen kildekode produkter, samt lettvekts-arkitektur og containere. Kaare er en velkjent foredragsholder innen mange Java og åpen kildekode emner, og er et aktivt medlem i miljøet rundt Maven.

Dan is a Chief Technical Officer and a founding member of Adaptavist.com who deal with Confluence Customization, Hosting, Support and Bespoke development. He has many years of Java expertise, as well as almost 2 decades of experience with unix and networking systems.
Kirk Pepperdine is the Chief Technical Officer at Kodewerk Ltd. and has been focused on Object technologies and performance tuning for the last 15 years. Kirk is a co-author of the book ANT Developers Handbook and editor at The Server Side.

Nick Sieger is an engineer at Engine Yard, working on JRuby and leading the effort to make the Java Virtual Machine a robust yet easy-to-use deployment platform for Rails and Ruby web applications. He created and co-maintains the JDBC adapter for ActiveRecord that JRuby on Rails uses for database connectivity, as well as the Warbler tool and JRuby-Rack library for dealing with Java application server deployment. He maintains a blog on Ruby and JRuby-related topics at http://blog.nicksieger.com/.

Hans Nilsson is the technical lead in Erlang Solutions' Stockholm office. He joined the Ericsson Computer Science Lab in 1988, the year after Joe Armstrong, the father of Erlang. He initially worked on the development of the highly regarded SICSTUS Prolog. In 1995, together with Claes Wikström, he developed the Mnesia DBMS and Mnemosyne query language. Hans then went on to study the budding Voice over IP field and implemented his first Erlang-based SIP stack in 1998, eventually becoming Ericsson's representative in the GSM Association SIP Technical Expert Group. Before joining Erlang Solutions, he worked in a tiger team doing advanced prototyping with Erlang in close cooperation with the Intel Performance Lab.

Jonas is a passionate software craftsman working as a senior consultant at BEKK Consulting in Trondheim. After working with .NET for 9 years he has gained broad experience and in–depth knowledge of the .NET Framework, ASP.NET, WPF, Silverlight and the C# programming language. Jonas has worked on several projects using various Microsoft technologies. Currently he is spending much of his time exploring design patterns, techniques and best practices for building rich client applications using technologies like Windows Presentation Foundation and Silverlight. Jonas is an active member of- and contributor to the .NET developer community. He is an experienced speaker from both local user groups as well as larger industry events like TechEd, NDC, REMIX and MSDN Live. In 2006 Jonas was nominated Microsoft Regional Director for his contributions and involvement with the Microsoft developer community, and his Silverlight efforts was rewarded with a Microsoft MVP award in 2009. He blogs regularly at http://jonas.follesoe.no and can be contacted at jonas@follesoe.no or on http://twitter.com/follesoe.

Harald has been lead developer and technical architect on a large scrum project for three years. His primary agenda is staying focused on technical quality, providing value and risk management. He's also tech lead of the Java competency network in Computas.

Trond Wingård is a Senior Project Manager in Statkraft, Europe's largest provider of renewable energy. He's a developer by heart, economist by education and project manager by occupation. Trond has been practicing agile since 2001, is co-arranging the Smidig20xx conferences in Oslo, and is a popular speaker on various aspects of agile project management.

Knut Vidar er sivilingeniør i datateknikk fra NTNU og arbeider som konsulent i Itera Consulting. Til daglig jobber han med systemutvikling i Java. Knut Vidars hovedinteresser er utvikling på web, programmeringsspråk, applikasjonssikkerhet og kodekvalitet. Han sitter i styret i OWASP Norway Chapter.

Espen Berger has worked in TANDBERG for 7 years with event based telecom systems. He introduced Java in TANDBERG 4 years ago and work with systems based on event driven architectures. Focusing the last year on technology and design patterns for distributed systems. TANDBERG is a leading global provider of telepresence, high-definition video conferencing and mobile video products.

Neal Ford is Software Architect and Meme Wrangler at ThoughtWorks, a global IT consultancy with an exclusive focus on end-to-end software development and delivery. He is also the designer and developer of applications, instructional materials, magazine articles, courseware, video/DVD presentations, and author and/or editor of 6 books spanning a variety of technologies, including the most recent The Productive Programmer. He focuses on designing and building of large-scale enterprise applications. He is also an internationally acclaimed speaker, speaking at over 100 developer conferences worldwide, delivering more than 600 talks. Check out his web site at http://www.nealford.com. He welcomes feedback and can be reached at nford@thoughtworks.com.

Matthew McCullough is an energetic 14 year veteran of enterprise software development, open source education, and co-founder of Ambient Ideas, LLC, a Denver consultancy. Matthew currently is a member of the JCP, reviewer for technology publishers including O'Reilly, author of the upcoming Presentation Patterns & Anti-Patterns book, multi-year speaker on the No Fluff Just Stuff tour, author of the DZone Maven, Git & Google App Engine RefCards, and President of the Denver Open Source Users Group. His experience includes successful JEE, SOA, and Web Service implementations for real estate, finance and telecommunications firms in addition to publishing several open source libraries. Matthew jumps at opportunities to mentor and educate teams on how to leverage open source. His current topics of R&D are Cloud Computing, Service Integrations, Maven, Git, and Hadoop. Matthew resides in Denver with his beautiful wife and 1.5 year old daughter, who are active in nearly every outdoor activity Colorado offers.

Johannes har jobbet med Java i ti år. I en årrekke drømte han om at et nytt og bedre språk skulle ta over etter Java. Han har nå gitt opp drømmen, og interesserer seg i stedet for hvordan å gjøre Java til et bedre språk. Til daglig jobber Johannes som softwarearkitekt og Scrum master på prosjekter innen offentlig sektor. Han er chief scientist i Steria.

Steve Freeman is an independent consultant specializing in Agile software development. A founder member of the London Extreme Tuesday Club, he was chair of the first XPDay and is a frequent organizer and presenter at international conferences. Steve has worked in a variety of organizations, from writing shrink-wrap software for IBM, to prototyping for major research laboratories. Steve has a Ph.D. from Cambridge University, and degrees in statistics and music. Steve is based in London, UK. Steve and Nat Pryce were joint winners of the 2006 Agile Alliance Gordon Pask award, and co-authored "Growing Object Oriented Software, Guided by Tests" (Addison-Wesley)
Nat Pryce has worked as a programmer, architect, trainer, and consultant in a variety of industries, including sports reportage, marketing communications, retail, telecoms, and finance. With a Ph.D. from Imperial College London, he has also worked on research projects and does occasional university teaching. An early adopter of Extreme Programming, he has written or contributed to several open source libraries that support Test Driven Development. He was one of the founding organizers of the London XPDay and regularly presents at international conferences. Nat is based in London, UK.

Per Spilling is a developer/architect/process mentor with 22 years experience in working with object technology (C++, Ada, Python, Actor, Concurrent C++, CORBA, Java). He is currently working as a principal consultant at Itera Consulting/Objectware in Oslo. His main work related interests are software architecture, software craftsmanship, DDD, agile methods and agile development tools. Per has been a member of the JavaZone program committee for the last 6 years.

With his background in programming, Dan Bergh Johnsson has taken a wider interest in system development and is equally interested in architecture and methodology. He as been the formal or informal lead architecture for several business critical systems since he left Uppsala University with a firm opinion that "code should mean something". Dan is an agile affectionado and a domain driven design enthusiast who also has spent a lot of time thinking about architecture, non-functional quality attributes, and how all these fit together. He shares his love in the craft by engaging heavily in Swedish agile communities, by speaking at conferences, and through his blog "Dear Junior - letters to a junior programmer". Dan is also partner at and the official spokesperson on "Architecture and Development Methodology" of Swedish security consultancy firm Omegapoint.

20 years experience as an IT-consultant and CTO, both in Norway and internationally. Expert resource for a lot of large java and open source products since 1995. Speaker at local (Norwegian Computer Society, various conferences) and international conferences (JavaZone in Norway, Component Computing in Finland), teacher and presenter at company-internal courses throughout Europa and an ambassador for sharing experiences and knowledge. Has experience with a lot of business domains through a lot of different projects. Currently working for Webstep in Norway with focus on enterprise- and solution architecture, coaching development teams and delivering solutions on open source and java platforms.

A danish software engineer with experience in the financial, telecommunications and computer games sectors, working as a senior consultant for Webstep in Norway. Growing up in a time and place with little to no access to programming literature, he initially learned programming on his own by looking at machinecode, probably causing a life-long interest in puzzles, physical and otherwise.

Patrycja Wegrzynowicz is CTO at Yon Consulting and Head of Yon Labs. There, she shapes the future direction of technological research in software as well as acts as a chief architect and consultant on the projects from the field of automated software engineering, domain names, and Internet security. She is a regular speaker at top academic (e.g., OOPSLA, ASE) as well as technical conferences (e.g., JavaOne, Devoxx, Jazoon). Patrycja holds a master degree in Computer Science and is currently finalizing her PhD at Warsaw University. Her academic interests are focused on architectural and design patterns along with automated software engineering, particularly static and dynamic analysis techniques to support program validation, verification, and comprehension.

Jason van Zyl is the Founder and CTO of Sonatype, the leader in Java development infrastructure whose customers include Intuit, eBay, Qualcomm and eTrade, and he has over 10 years of experience in open source and proprietary enterprise software development. Prior to Sonatype, Jason was the founder Periapt, Inc., a company that provided software infrastructure development services to Fortune 500 companies such as Toyota Corp., Bank of America, and Coca-Cola Co. Before Periapt, he worked as a Technology Architect at Compusense, a world leader in sensory analysis and data research. An open source enthusiast, Jason is one of the founders of the Apache Maven project, and founder the Plexus IoC framework, and the Apache Velocity project. Jason currently serves as Chair of the Apache Maven Project Management Committee. He has been involved with the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) for seven years, helped to found Codehaus, a well respected incubation facility for open source community projects, and is a frequent speaker at many major software conferences, including JavaOne, EclipseCon, EmergingTech, and ApacheCon.

Costin is a senior software engineer at SpringSource, VMware. His interests include data access and aspect oriented programming. With significant development experience, Costin is involved in the development of Spring framework, Pitchfork, Spring Modules and Spring JavaConfig. Leads Spring Dynamic Modules (Spring OSGi) project and the Spring-inspired, OSGi 4.2 Blueprint Service RI. Speaker at various editions of EclipseCon/OSGi DevCon, Javapolis, JavaZone, SpringOne, SpringOne2GX, TSSJS, TSE on Java/Spring/OSGi related topics.

Morten er en selvutnevnt Springevangelist. De siste årene har han jobbet med Spring og Spring Batch i forskjellige prosjekter i Norge og utlandet. Når folk sier at Spring er skyld i deres problemer pleier Morten å si "Spring doesn't kill people, people do".

Trygve Laugstøl jobber i Arktekk som utvikler, arkitekt og har mange års erfaring med Java-utvikling. Han har lang erfaring med utvikling og bruk av åpen kildekode som kjerneutvikler av Maven 2 og Continuum. Trygve har jobbet lenge med utvikling av plugins som støtter opp om smidig utvikling og som rådgiver innenfor disse områdene.

Thomas har over et tiårs bred erfaring fra en mengde teknologier og arbeidsroller. Han elsker høynivå programmeringsspråk, fleksible verktøy og lettvekt teknologi. Thomas lærer stadig nye ting, og setter stor pris på å dele erfaringer og meninger underveis.

Neal Ford is Software Architect and Meme Wrangler at ThoughtWorks, a global IT consultancy with an exclusive focus on end-to-end software development and delivery. He is also the designer and developer of applications, instructional materials, magazine articles, courseware, video/DVD presentations, and author and/or editor of 6 books spanning a variety of technologies, including the most recent The Productive Programmer. He focuses on designing and building of large-scale enterprise applications. He is also an internationally acclaimed speaker, speaking at over 100 developer conferences worldwide, delivering more than 600 talks. Check out his web site at http://www.nealford.com. He welcomes feedback and can be reached at nford@thoughtworks.com.

Bjørn Nordlund is head architect at BBS and his main goal with programming and system development is to make things simpler and more manageable. To achieve this it is important to understand, identify and solve the real problem, which is often concealed behind technical impediments.

Jon Jagger is an independent software coach-consultant-trainer-enthusiast based in England. He specializes in agile software development: people, process and principles. His passion is helping people improve their effectiveness. He served as the convenor and principal UK expert on the ECMA C# committee and has co-authored two books on C#. He is a frequent visitor to Oslo and has presented at the Oslo C++ User Group and JavaBin aswell as at the XP, NDC, and ACCU conferences. You can follow him at http://jonjagger.blogspot.com/ and http://twitter.com/JonJagger He is 43, married with three children. He loves freshwater river fishing.

Kevlin Henney is an independent consultant based in the UK. He specialises in programming languages, OO design, patterns, development process and software architecture, helping teams adopt techniques and improve their software development through training, mentoring and reviewing. He is and has been a columnist for various magazines and web sites, including the Reg Developer channel of The Register, SearchSoftwareQuality.com and Better Software. He is also coauthor of two volumes in the Pattern-Oriented Software Architecture series, A Pattern Language for Distributed Computing and On Patterns and Pattern Languages.

Jon-Anders is a consultant at Arktekk doing various Java related stuff He's been in love with Scala for about three years and has contributed to several open source scala projects during that time. Besides writing code he has co-founded scalaBin - the Norwegian Scala User Group, and is part of the JavaZone Program Committee

Jonas is co-founder of Kaazing, and is passionate about changing the Web and bringing it back to the future. Jonas speak frequently at international conferences and has written numerous articles for leading IT magazines. He is also co-author of the book, Pro JSF and Ajax: Building Rich Internet Components (Apress).
John is co-founder of Kaazing, and has a keen interest in challenging the status quo to break down barriers and reach new levels of scalability and performance for Web communication. John speaks frequently at international conferences and has written numerous articles for leading IT magazines. He is also co-author of the book, Pro JSF and Ajax: Building Rich Internet Components (Apress).

Timothy Perrett is a UK based developer and architect currently working for a division of Xerox Corporation in Europe, Middle East and Africa and author of Lift in Action, the book about Lift. Having worked in and around manufacturing and workflow systems for nearly 7 years, he has wealth of experience building machine automation and writing system integration middleware. Tim is an active committer on the Lift project and has been for the past three years.

Håvard Wigtil er arkitekt og utvikler i Kantega AS, der han for det meste jobber med virksomhetskritiske løsninger innen bank og finans. Interesser inkluderer brukervennlige løsninger, åpne standarder og open source, men også nysnø og blå sjø.

Trond Arve Wasskog er utvikler og CTO i Bekk Consulting. Han har jobbet med Java og Java EE applikasjonsutvikling i mer enn ti år, med fokus på smidig utvikling, kvalitet og vedlikeholdbarhet.

Bjørn Nordlund is head architect at BBS and his main goal with programming and system development is to make things simpler and more manageable. To achieve this it is important to understand, identify and solve the real problem, which is often concealed behind technical impediments.

Dan Diephouse is a core engineer at MuleSoft, working on their Mule and Tcat products. He's been doing product development in the open source integration and middleware space long enough now that he probably has a warped mind. When he's not doing that, he's probably travelling or trying to find a great meal and beverage.

Tim Berglund runs a consulting firm called the August Technology Group (http://augusttechgroup.com), which provides training and development services to customers building web applications with open-source tools running on the JVM. He likes it best when these include Groovy and Grails. His technology interests span web applications, business integration, data architecture, and software architecture, but his greatest passion is to help developers improve in their craft. He is a speaker internationally and at on the No Fluff Just Stuff tour in the United States, and helps lead IASA Denver (http://iasadenver.org) and the Denver Open Source User Group (http://denveropensource.org) in the Denver area. He lives in Littleton, CO with the wife of his youth and their three children.

Inga Kristine Holen is systems consultant at Steria AS, where she is working as a Java programmer.

Aslak Hellesøy is the Chief Scientist of BEKK Consulting - a Norwegian Consulting firm with 250 employees. Aslak is a published author and frequent speaker about agile, open source and new, cool technology. He has contributed to dozens of open source projects and is the creator of Cucumber (http://cukes.info/)

Kevlin is an independent consultant and trainer based in the UK. His development interests are in patterns, programming, practice and process. He has been a columnist for various magazines and web sites, including Better Software, The Register, Application Development Advisor, Java Report and the C/C++ Users Journal. Kevlin is co-author of A Pattern Language for Distributed Computing and On Patterns and Pattern Languages, two volumes in the Pattern-Oriented Software Architecture series. He is also editor of the 97 Things Every Programmer Should Know site and book.

Tobias er fagsjef i Know IT Objectnet. Han har 12 års erfaring fra konsulentbransjen hvor han stort sett har jobbet med utvikling av store mellomvareløsninger implementert i Java. Tobias er tidligere styremedlem i javaBin og satt i JavaZones programkomite fra 2004-2009. Tre av disse årene fungerte han som leder. Tobias har tidligere hold foredrag på javaBin, JavaZone, goOpen og rOOts.

Øyvind er utdannet sivilingeniør fra NTNU og jobber hos Itera Consulting.

Trond works in Sun/Oracle's Professional Services team in the Nordics with a focus on application servers, enterprise integration and core Java and JVM technologies. Trond is an experienced consultant with more than a decade of Java and enterprise project background. He hold presentations on a regular basis, and has presented several times for JavaZone and JavaBIN.

Jon Gunnar Wold is an experienced speaker and workshop facilitator and is working as a senior usability and design advisor in one of the largest agile projects in Norway, rebuilding the central application for the Norwegian Government pension fund in Flex. Jon Gunnar is a veteran of RIA since working as the lead designer on the highly successful classified ad site FINN.no and has a deep understanding of the usabiliy and accessibility of web forms and web applications through repeated usabilitytesting of web interfaces.

Masoud Kalali hold a software engineering degree and has been working on software development projects since 1998. He has experience with a variety of technologies (.Net, J2EE, CORBA, and COM+) on diverse platforms (Solaris, Linux, and Windows). His experience is in software architecture, design and server side development. He is one of the founder members of NetBeans Dream Team. Masoud's main area of research and interest includes Web Services and Service Oriented Architecture along with large scale and high throughput systems' development and deployment. Masoud is author of GlassFish Security book published by Packt in addition to being author of several other refcards and articles published by Java.net and DZone. Masoud's weblog is located at http://kalali.me

Joonas Lehtinen has a PhD in computer science and is one of the core developers of Vaadin, a Java-based framework for building business-oriented Rich Internet Applications. Joonas has been developing applications for the web since 1995 with a strong focus on Ajax and Java. He is the founder and CEO of ITMill, the company behind the Vaadin framework.

Greg Young is an independent consultant who lives in two suitcases (literally). When not travelling around working for clients throughout the world you can often find him on the domain driven design list, blogging at codebetter.com, or floating upside down in a kayak through rapids. At the moment Greg is working on starting up a data provisioning and algorithmic trading company in South Africa.

Jonas Bonér is a programmer, teacher, mentor, speaker and author who spends most of his time consulting, hacking on open source as well as lecturing and speaking at developer conferences world-wide. He has worked at Terracotta, the JRockit JVM at BEA and is an active contributor to the Open Source community; most notably created the Akka Project, AspectWerkz Aspect-Oriented Programming (AOP) framework, committer to the Terracotta JVM clustering technology and been part of the Eclipse AspectJ team. Blog: http://jonasboner.com

Vegard Hartmann er Seniorkonsulent i Bekk Consulting. Han har siden 2005 jobbet både med nyutvikling og forvaltning av en rekke applikasjoner.
Øyvind er konsulent i BEKK. Han har siden 2008 jobbet med Java-utvikling i virksomhetskritiske applikasjoner, og innehar erfaring på automatisert testing. Han har også solid kompetanse på Smidige metoder, illustrert ved bl.a masteroppgave på NTNU, publisert artikkel, og foredrag om Scrum på både norske og internasjonale konferanser.

Stephen Colebourne is a Java Champion and JavaOne Rock Star speaker. He has been working with Java since version 1.0 and contributing to open source software since 2000. He has made major contributions to Apache Commons and created the Joda open source projects including Joda-Time. He blogs on Java topics and is a frequent conference speaker, including Devoxx and JavaEdge. He is currently co-spec lead on JSR-310 and a contributor to discussions on language change such as Project Coin and Lambda.

André Wiik has made solutions based on Java for more than 10 years mainly in the telecom and banking industry where demands for high performance and availability is key requirements. He was part of Net4Call which was eventually acquired by Oracle. He has a pragmatic attitude towards challenges and is a promoter of open source software and agile methodology. Today André is Senior Consultant with Webstep AS in Oslo and serves as developer, architect or tech lead.

Mark Fisher is an engineer within the SpringSource division of VMware and lead of the Spring Integration project. He is also a committer on the core Spring Framework and the Spring BlazeDS Integration project. In addition to his role as an engineer, Mark spends a significant amount of time working with customers as a consultant and trainer. The focus of such engagements is primarily in the realm of enterprise integration, messaging, and event-driven applications. Mark is a frequent speaker at conferences and user groups in North America and Europe, and along with other Spring Integration committers, he is an author of the forthcoming book, “Spring Integration in Action”, to be published in 2010 by Manning.

John is a regular speaker at technology and banking conferences, his background in technology goes back some 30 years and investment banking over 20 from programmer to head of technology and global chief architect at banks like BNP Paribas and JP Morgan. In 2000 he co-founded a company (C24) producing Java integration solutions for investments banks (SWIFT, FpML ISO-20022 etc.) and sold that to IONA technologies in 2007. Since then John co-founded Incept5, specialising in extreme enterprise solutions, clients include VISA US and Carlyle Group. John still codes and has several successful iPhone and iPad applications coded mostly while travelling to and from San Francisco. John has three young boys, a French wife and enjoys photography.

Great programmers are usually lousy designers, and vice versa, but Martin is one of those rare cross-breeds who can handle both. Graphics programming and GUI design suits him particularly well, but being a true perfectionist, he's rarely satisfied with the results of his own work. Martin has several years of Swing work behind him, and he's been creating 2D and 3D graphics for over ten years. Martin currently works as a consultant for Epsilon, with user experience as one of his specialities.
Pär is a passionate developer whoʼs been working with client side Java for more than ten years and that is hoping for another ten years filled with challenges and new technology. Pär is a fast learner with a need to always learn more and never being satisfied, always wanting more. This is a good thing since GUI programming always ends up on pixel level where the details are of utter most importance.

Pragmatic programmer, works as a consultant for Zenior AS. Has introduced git in large corporate norwegian project and held several courses for other corporate git customers.

Andreas Øverland is co-founder of Bekk Consulting, and has been coding HTML since 1994ish and Java since 1996. Now Mr. Øverland is concentrating on the "upper" parts of complex web applications with main technical focus on JavaScript, HTML, CSS and Java, also dabbling in the craft of designing user interaction. Other describing keywords include : Commodore 64, TurboPascal, C, Intel Assembly, Winner of The Gathering '94 PC-demo competition, Avid Photographer, Husband of One, Father of Two, Displacement > 0.1 Metric Ton, Fan of Fyodor Dostoevsky, Christopher Hitchens and Richard Dawkins.

Geir Andrè Lund is a senior knowledge engineer at Computas A/S, a norwegian based software services company. Currently a developer on a Java based project. Geir Andrè holds a Bsc. in Information Technology and Msc. in Information Systems, his main interest is Java-based technologies, agile software development practices and craftmanship.

Janniche Haugen har 6 års erfaring fra utviklingsprosjekter. Hun har høy fokus på testing og utvikling av god Java kode. Favoritt sitat: "Expert programmers are those who write code even idiot programmers can understand. Idiot programmers are those who write code not even expert programmers can understand."

Aleksander holds a MSc in Computer Science from the University of Agder and Carleton University in Canada, specializing in Pattern Recognition and Textual Analysis. He has been working as a lead developer in Integrasco AS since 2004, focusing mainly on developing the search technology that the company use today. Today, Aleksander holds the position as Analytics Director at Integrasco, being in charge of all client deliverables and client communications. He works closely with the R&D team to better build intelligent solutions that can benefit in providing both clients and in-house analysts with the best possible tools. Aleksander has broad experience with Java development and technologies such as Lucene Search, Solr, Hibernate, Mysql, Spring and Hibernate Shards, with keen interests in search, machine learning, pattern recognition and scalability.
Jaran graduated with a Master of Computer Science in 2007. Since 2004 he has been working at Integrasco AS, developing web mining and search technology for analyzing social and consumer generated media. Today he holds the position as Head of R&D at Integrasco and is in charge of the development of scalable data mining and search technology as well as intelligent processes based on machine learning and pattern recognition. His interests range from the curious little code snippet to large scale system architecture and has spent most of his career this far fullfilling this interest on the Java platform.

Eirik jobber som java-utvikler hos Bekk Consulting. Han har det siste året jobbet på et større migreringsprosjekt som skal flytte en stormaskin-løsning over på java-plattformen.

Consultant at Bekk Consulting. System developer with years of experience with developing web and mobile applications in Java.

Tim Berglund runs a consulting firm called the August Technology Group (http://augusttechgroup.com), which provides training and development services to customers building web applications with open-source tools running on the JVM. He likes it best when these include Groovy and Grails. His technology interests span web applications, business integration, data architecture, and software architecture, but his greatest passion is to help developers improve in their craft. He is a speaker internationally and at on the No Fluff Just Stuff tour in the United States, and helps lead IASA Denver (http://iasadenver.org) and the Denver Open Source User Group (http://denveropensource.org) in the Denver area. He lives in Littleton, CO with the wife of his youth and their three children.

Guillaume Bort is lead developer of the Play! framework, co-founder and CTO of Zenexity, a company specialized in web architecture. In his day time job, he is advising prestigious companies over their web architecture while enjoying working on play! framework during his night job. He has also contributed to numerous open source projects over the time.
Nicolas Leroux is a senior architect and managing partner at Lunatech, having joined in 2001. Nicolas is an expert early adopter of the Java Enterprise platform as well as the open-source technologies that gravitate around it. He applies this experience and technical expertise of the JBoss middleware platform on Lunatech's projects and for Sdu Uitgevers. On recent projects he has applied both the jBPM work-flow framework and the Drools rules engine. Nicolas is also an open source enthusiast and more specifically a Java enthusiast. He is the co-founder of the Benelux JBoss User Group and the Riviera Java User Group . He also contributes to the open source frameworks he uses by committing patches. Nicolas recently developed a passion for the play! framework and is now a core developer of the framework.

Kristian Berg er utdannet ved Høgskolen i Bergen og jobber som utvikler for InteliNet AS. Har jobbet med utvikling av programvare siden 1997 og hovedsaklig med Java siden 2002. Hovedinteresse er styring og overvåking av telekom-systemer. Styremedlem i javaBin Bergen.

Are er seniorkonsulent i Capgemini, og arbeider til daglig med utvikling og feilretting på NAV Pensjonsprogrammet. Stor entusiasme for internett, gadgets, programmering og åpne plattformer har smeltet sammen til et stort engasjement for Android i denne karen.
Truls er fagansvarlig for Java i Capgemini Norge, og har erfaring med utvikling, funksjonell design og teknisk arkitektur fra et av Norges største IT-prosjekter. Truls er opptatt av Open Source, og han lar seg begeistre av nye, åpne plattformer. Det var slik han møtte Android og ble en av initiativtagerne til Android-faggruppen i Capgemini.

Mr. Ivanov has almost 20 years of experience in software development with last 10 years spent developing grid computing and distributed middleware software. In 2005 Mr. Ivanov founded GridGain project that has become one of the most rapidly growing Java-based cloud and grid computing software – with GridGain software starting every few seconds around the world. Back in 1996, Mr. Ivanov was one of the pioneers in using Java technology for server side middleware development while working at T-Systems GmbH, one of the largest European System Integrator. Mr. Ivanov has held various positions architecting and leading software product development for start-up companies and working with well-established companies such as Adaptec, Visa and BEA Systems. Mr. Ivanov is an active member of Java middleware community and is a contributor to Java specifications as a member of JSR-107. Mr. Ivanov holds a Master's degree in Electro Mechanics from Baltic State Technical University, Saint Petersburg, Russia.

Josh Long (http://www.joshlong.com) is an enterprise architect, consultant, speaker and author, and engineer. Josh is co-author of Apress' "Spring Enterprise Recipes," and Apress' upcoming "Spring Recipes 2nd edition.” He is a member of the JCP, as well as an editor for the popular technology portal Infoq.com. Josh is a frequent speaker at conferences, both nationally and internationally, on a number of topics ranging from business process management, web frameworks, enterprise application integration and architecture patterns. His interests include scalability, BPM, grid computing, mobile computing and so-called "smart" systems. He is also a SpringSource employee and a committer on the Spring Integration project.

Rickard has worked on several OpenSource projects that involve J2EE development, such as JBoss, XDoclet and WebWork. He has also been the principal architect of the SiteVision CMS/portal platform, where he used AOP as the foundation. Now he works for Jayway, and is building next-generation software to implement Getting Things Done principles for organizations.

Randy Stafford is a practicing software professional with 20 years’ experience as a developer, analyst, architect, manager, consultant, author and presenter. Currently for Oracle’s product development organization, he engages globally for proof-of-concept projects, architecture reviews, and production crises with diverse customer organizations, specializing in grid, SOA, performance, HA, and JEE/ORM work. In past lives, Mr. Stafford has been Technical Advisor to agile vendor Rally Software, Chief Architect of SaaS company IQNavigator, Director of Development of SynXis Agent (acquired by Sabre), consultant for GemStone and Smalltalk, and a simulation specialist in the aerospace and CASE industries. Long active in the professional community, he was a contributor to O’Reilly’s 97 Things Every Programmer Should Know and 97 Things Every Software Architect Should Know, Martin Fowler’s Patterns of Enterprise Application Architecture, and Floyd Marinescu’s EJB Design Patterns, and a reviewer of other enterprise patterns books. He has published articles in various professional periodicals, and presented at conferences of the Society for Computer Simulation, the International Council on Systems Engineering, the Agile Development Conference, Oracle Open World, Oredev, SpringOne, and JavaZone. He has also participated heavily in online communities devoted to architecture and agile development. His professional interests include domain model persistence, enterprise application architecture, application performance management, requirements analysis and specification, software development process, organizational culture, and leadership of people. Mr. Stafford is motivated to improve the practice of software development and solve problems facing society. He lives in his native Denver, Colorado with his wife and family.

Christian Johansen jobber som programmerer i Shortcut, der han primært fokuserer på utvikling av løsninger for web og mobile platformer. Hans hovedfokus har i mange år vært frontend-utvikling med teknologier så som HTML, CSS og ikke minst JavaScript. Christian har jobbet med frontend for web for flere av Norges største selskaper, og har over en lengre periode vært spesielt opptatt av å gjenskape utviklingsmiljøet han kjenner og brenner for på server-siden for JavaScript. Dette inkluderer gode verktøy for testing som kan tilrettelegge for testdrevet utvikling. Erfaringen med slike verktøy for JavaScript summeres opp i boken "Test Driven JavaScript Development" som slippes via Addison-Wesley Professional høsten 2010.

Alasdair Nottingham is the lead software engineer for IBM's OSGi Applications Feature Pack for WebSphere Application Server. He has five years of experience with OSGi, in 2006 he was part of the team that brought OSGi to WebSphere Application Server version 6.1. More recently Alasdair has been an active participant in the OSGi Alliance standards body, mainly under the auspices of Enterprise Expert Group whose focus is defining standards for building modular applications for the enterprise. He is a member of the Apache Aries incubator's podling project management committee and a committer. Alasdair has been working on enterprise application middleware for eight years working on four different versions of WebSphere Application Server. He has worked on various aspects of WebSphere Application Server in that time, including JMS, message mediation and messaging security in addition to his work on modularisation of the application server. Alasdair Nottingham is a regular speaker at the UK WebSphere User Group and spoke about modular applications at inaugural London Java Community Unconference in 2009.

Håkon is a Senior Consultant at Miles. He has experience from both J2ME development and whole stack development for public and financial institutions. His interests lies in the craft of programming, and he is always looking for ways to let developers focus on creating, rather than configuring.

Anders Norås is a seasoned software developer and speaker. The 'enterpriseyness' of EJB drove him to Microsoft .NET back in 2002. He quickly made a name for himself in the Microsoft community by using his Java experiences to get a head start on fellow developers. In 2006 he got reacquainted with his lost love — Java — and today he is a polyglot combining the best of both worlds to build better software. Anders is the founder of the Quaere project and a contributor to a few open-source projects. He has given talks at many conferences and user group meetings and is known for talks with few slides and lots of code. Anders lives in Norway where he works for Objectware as their chief technology evangelist. You can read his blog at http://andersnoras.com.

Senior consultant. Developer with more than 10 years experience of Java projects, some of them using agile methods.
Managing Consultant. Profet for Agile methods in Capgemini Norway, and an experienced user of agile methods.

Andres is a Java/Groovy developer with more than 10 years of experience in software design and development. He has been involved in web and desktop application development since the early days of Java. He is a true believer in open source and has participated on popular projects like Groovy, Griffon, and DbUnit, as well as starting his own projects (Json-lib, EZMorph, GraphicsBuilder, JideBuilder). Founding member of the Griffon framework. Andres maintains a blog at http://jroller.com/aalmiray

20 years experience as an IT-consultant and CTO, both in Norway and internationally. Expert resource for a lot of large java and open source products since 1995. Speaker at local (Norwegian Computer Society, various conferences) and international conferences (JavaZone in Norway, Component Computing in Finland), teacher and presenter at company-internal courses throughout Europa and an ambassador for sharing experiences and knowledge. Has experience with a lot of business domains through a lot of different projects. Currently working for Webstep in Norway with focus on enterprise- and solution architecture, coaching development teams and delivering solutions on open source and java platforms.
Sun Java Champion and former president of the very successful Norwegian JUG javaBin and JavaZone. Member of the Advisory Board of java.net. Speaker on several conferences including JavaZone, JavaONE, CommunityONE, Microsoft Application Platform, Smidig, OMG Information Days, the Software conference and various others. With over 30 years of professional programming experience spanning quite a few programming languages he has contributed in both international and domestic projects in various roles, including project leader, technology mentor, software architect, lead developer, technology strategist and trainer.

Jeg jobber for tiden som utvikler i Machina AS. Det siste året eller så har jeg deltatt på et prosjekt der vi har hatt bruk for å samtidig ha fleksibiliteten og tryggheten som kommer med modellbasert utvikling og den raske utviklingstakten som er mulig med Grails. For å få til dette utviklet jeg emf2gorm og har brukt dette vertøyet igjennom hele utviklingen av det nevnte prosjektet.

Trond Marius jobber som seniorkonsulent i Mesan. Han har jobbet som Scrummaster, teamleder og teknisk arkitekt i flere prosjekter og har hatt ansvaret for bruk av versjonskontroll i disse. Git har etter en bratt læringskurve med mange feil valg gjort hverdagen enklere for hele teamet.

Mårten Haglind is a Senior Java Consultant, Coder and Architect mainly in the Java Enterprise sphere with extensive hands-on experience from the field. He has worked as solution architect and senior developer in several medium to large scale development efforts within industries like banking, insurance, government and automotive. He is a much appreciated mentor, instructor and speaker. He is based in Gothenburg, Sweden and also works internationally. Instructor and course author for Programutvikling AS.

Alexis Moussine-Pouchkine is a member of the GlassFish team and has been acting as the ambassador for the project for the past couple of years. He has has been working at Sun Microsystems (and now Oracle) for over 10 years and is a regular speaker at development and JUG conferences such as Devoxx, CommunityOne, or JavaZone. He also spends quality time with customers, developers, and architects to better drive the evolution of Sun's middleware technologies. Alexis participates in various open source communities, translates Java & XML books into French, but also has a live outside of Java! Read his technical blog at http://blogs.sun.com/alexismp

Kresten Krab Thorup is CTO of Trifork, a public Danish company providing software solutions to government and financial services providers. Trifork is also creator of the long-running JAOO conference, and co-creator of QCon. As Trifork CTO Kresten in responsible for technical strategy, and spends most of the time acting as internal consultant, researching future technologies, as well as being editor for JAOO and QCon conferences. Kresten has also been a principal contributor to Trifork's own Java EE certified application server "Trifork T4", where he authored the built-in CORBA ORB, a custom Java RMI implementation (now part of Apache Yoko), the transaction manager, the database connection management system, and the Java byte code rewriting subsystem. Kresten has been a contributor to several open source projects, including GCC, GNU Objective-C, GNU Compiled Java, Emacs, and Apache Geronimo/Yoko. Before joining Trifork, Kresten worked at NeXT Software (now acquired by Apple), where he was responsible for the development of the Objective-C tool chain, the debugger, and the runtime system. Kresten was on the committee for JSR-14 (adding generics to Java) which was closely related to the subject of his Ph.D. thesis. Most recently, Kresten has founded the Erjang open source project (notice the J there), a virtual machine for Erlang running on the Java Virtual Machine.

Sondre has been coding[1] for food since about 1998. He is an experienced architect and project manager with a strong track record. Sondre holds an MSc degree from NTNU and an MBA in technology management from NTNU and MIT Sloan. He is currently running his own company, Innovation Consulting. [1] - As well as starting two companies, being employee number three in Inspera that is currently around 30, and wearing a suit every day in the management consulting industry for a short while.

Henning Spjelkavik is one of the chief architects behind popular sites like Skiinfo.com and map solution at FINN.no. He has 10 years of server side experience with java, and enjoys reading and testing new methods and methodologies, and analysing problems. You might have met him at Javazone or Smidig talking about mapping, lean, systems thinking or character encoding problems.

Aleksander Blomskøld jobber til daglig som utvikler hos BBS. Han har erfaring både fra webutvikling og javabasert batchprosessering. Aleksander er generelt nysgjerrig på alt innenfor teknologi og programmering.
Rita Nordtug jobber til daglig som arkitekt og utvikler hos BBS. Hun har 10 års erfaring med utvikling og design av java applikasjoner, med fokus på smidig utvikling, ryddige og klart forståelige design og vedlikeholdbar kode.

Matthew McCullough is an energetic 14 year veteran of enterprise software development, open source education, and co-founder of Ambient Ideas, LLC, a Denver consultancy. Matthew currently is a member of the JCP, reviewer for technology publishers including O'Reilly, author of the upcoming Presentation Patterns & Anti-Patterns book, multi-year speaker on the No Fluff Just Stuff tour, author of the DZone Maven, Git & Google App Engine RefCards, and President of the Denver Open Source Users Group. His experience includes successful JEE, SOA, and Web Service implementations for real estate, finance and telecommunications firms in addition to publishing several open source libraries. Matthew jumps at opportunities to mentor and educate teams on how to leverage open source. His current topics of R&D are Cloud Computing, Service Integrations, Maven, Git, and Hadoop. Matthew resides in Denver with his beautiful wife and 1.5 year old daughter, who are active in nearly every outdoor activity Colorado offers.

Lars Søraas er utdannet cand.scient. informatikk fra UiB, og jobber som utvikler for Intelinet AS. Han har jobbet med utvikling av programvare siden BASIC var hot. Hovedinteresse er styring og overvåking av telekom-systemer.

Tobias er fagsjef i Know IT Objectnet. Han har 12 års erfaring fra konsulentbransjen hvor han stort sett har jobbet med utvikling av store mellomvareløsninger implementert i Java. Tobias er tidligere styremedlem i javaBin og satt i JavaZones programkomite fra 2004-2009. Tre av disse årene fungerte han som leder. Tobias har tidligere hold foredrag på javaBin, JavaZone, goOpen og rOOts.

Olve Maudal loves to write code, but is perhaps more interested in how software is developed than what it actually does. Since 2004, Olve has been working for TANDBERG, the leading provider of telepresence and video conferencing products and solutions. Previous experience includes developing systems for finding oil (Schlumberger 1996-2000), and developing systems for electronically moving money (BBS 2000-2004). Olve is an active member of the vibrant geek community in Oslo where he is involved in JavaPils, Cantara, XP Meetup, Oslo C++ Users Group, Lean Meetup and a few other things. You can follow him at http://olvemaudal.wordpress.com and http://twitter.com/olvemaudal
Jon Jagger is an independent software coach-consultant-trainer-enthusiast based in England. He specializes in agile software development (people, process and principles), test driven development, deliberate practice, design, analysis, OO, UML and curly bracket languages. He served as the convenor and principal UK expert on the ECMA C# committee and has co-authored two books on C#. He is a frequent visitor to Oslo and has presented at the Oslo C++ User Group and JavaBin. He is a regular speaker at the Accu conferences. You can follow him at http://jonjagger.blogspot.com/ and http://twitter.com/JonJagger He is 43, married with three children. He loves freshwater river fishing.

Margaretha Miles har jobbet i 25 år i Steria Norge med utvikling, testing og forvaltning. Hun har fått en god intuisjon om hvilke feil som typisk oppstår i programmer etter at de er levert.

Knut has worked with search engines and related web scale systems for 10 years in FAST, Yahoo! and Google holding positions such as engineer, project manager, program manager and engineering manager. He founded Sincerial AS, a company developing and hosting a recommendation engine for web sites and is currently a senior consultant at Conceptos Consulting Trondheim. Knut has also found time to develop Pillow, an open-source routing and resharding server for CouchDB.

Kjetil Moløkken-Østvold has extensive experience with software estimation and process improvement, both as a consultant and researcher. He is a frequent speaker at conference venues, including Agile, Smidig, JavaZone and Software. His most recent projects include quality assurance of three large (>500 MNOK) public sector projects, and process improvement projects for multinational telecom- and financial companies. He has also worked as an external advisor on developing a web-based collaboration platform supporting requirement handling, estimation and experience sharing. Kjetil is currently a Senior Partner at Conceptos Consulting. His previous experience includes working as assistant director and postdoctor at Simula Research Laboratory. Kjetil received his MSc and PhD from the University of Oslo in 2002 and 2004 respectively. He is the author of 23 scientific papers published in international journals and proceedings. Topics include cost estimation, agile software development, project management, public software projects, collaboration and communication, group processes and contracts. A list of publications can be found at: http://simula.no/people/kjetilmo/bibliography.

Nina har en sivilingeniørgrad i Kommunikasjonsteknologi fra NTNU, og er ansatt som konsulent i Javaavdelingen i Itera Consulting (tidligere Objectware). Hennes hovedinteresser er programmeringsspråk, smidige metoder og kodekvalitet. Hun er aktiv i Java-miljøet i Oslo med sin deltakelse i møtegruppen til javaBin.
Karianne har en mastergrad i IKT fra Universitetet i Bergen. Etter to år i Oslo har hun nå nylig flyttet tilbake til Bergen for å jobbe som konsulent for Miles. Hennes hovedinteresser er patterns, smidig utvikling og spennende teknologi. Karianne brenner for et aktivt fagmiljø, og er medarrangør av konferansene ROOTS og Smidig og inntil nylig den månedlige møteplassen Oslo XP Meetup. Hun er også en ivrig foredragsholder, og har tidligere holdt foredrag på konferansene Smidig, Javazone, XP og NDC, i tillegg til ulike brukergruppemøter. Karianne har også opparbeidet seg ekstensiv kunnskap om ninjaer, delvis gjennom å ha sett dokumentarfilmen "Ninja Assassin" fire ganger. Da hun var liten sparte hun penger til nunchakus.

Yngvar is a senior consultant and user interface expert at Bouvet ASA with Java experience since 1997. His primary fields of interest are AOP, rich user interfaces and interaction design.

Dr. Jim Webber is director of professional services for ThoughtWorks where he works on dependable distributed systems architecture for clients worldwide. Jim was formerly a senior researcher with the UK E-Science programme where he developed strategies for aligning Grid computing with Web Services practices and architectural patterns for dependable Service-Oriented computing and has extensive Web and Web Services architecture and development experience. As an architect with Hewlett-Packard, and later Arjuna Technologies, Jim was the lead developer on the industry's first Web Services Transaction solution. Jim is an active speaker and is invited to speak regularly at conferences across the globe. He is an active author and in addition to "Developing Enterprise Web Services - An Architect's Guide" he is working on a new book on Web-based integration. Jim holds a B.Sc. in Computing Science and Ph.D. in Parallel Computing both from the University of Newcastle upon Tyne. His blog is located at http://jim.webber.name.

Ole-Martin Mørk har jobbet med personalisering og algoritmer i Open AdExchange i to år. Open AdExchange blir overlesset med data hver dag og vi er helt avhengig av algoritmer som skalerer godt for å håndtere disse mengdene. Ole-Martin er del av et team på fire utviklere som jobber med disse utfordringene hver dag. Han har jobbet med Java i 12 år og har i den seneste tiden fått veldig sterk interesse for skalering av både programvare og kjøretidsmiljøer.

Stian Grenborgen jobber som Javaprogrammerer og applikasjonsarkitekt i BBS, blant annet med å utvikle APIer som blir benyttet i store deler av bedriften. Gjennom dette arbeidet, samt engasjement i "free/open source"-prosjekter, har han jobbet med og brukt fritiden på utvikling av Java-APIer.

Mario is on an experienced developer and architect currently working with SOA, integration and IT-architecture at CIBER Norway. Mario is one of Ciber's leading resources on SOA and EAI. Ciber is an acknowledged consulting company, delivering mission critical solutions with strong focus on Java, and related technologies. Mario holds a Master of Computer Science from Norwegian University of Science and Technology. His main interests are SOA and SOA Governance, Enterprise Architecture, Agile methods and software development on the Java platform.

Anders Sveen jobber som teknologileder for Java hos Capgeminin Norge. Han har over 5 års erfaring som utvikler og arkitekt med skreddersydde systemløsninger i Java, og har jobbet med smidig utvikling de siste 4 av disse. Han har hatt roller som spenner fra systemutvikler til scrum master, og jobber for at prosess og teknologi skal spille sammen slik at man kan maksimere potensialet av en smidig prosess.

Andreas is a 28 year old Norwegian polyglot developer at Know IT Objectnet.

Svein-Magnus is a technically minded Business Analyst at IteraConsulting, with a M.Sc. in communications technology. He primarily works with developing innovative solutions using creative methodologies, the past five years focusing on information architecture and user experience in web-based solutions and social technologies. Get more insights on such and other topics in his weblog at http://blog.menneske.org or by following @SveinMagnus on Twitter.

Ian Robinson (http://iansrobinson.com/) is a Principal Technical Consultant with ThoughtWorks, where he specializes in the design and delivery of service-oriented and distributed systems. Ian has worked with Microsoft’ patterns and practices team on implementing integration patterns with Microsoft technologies, and has published articles on business-oriented development methodologies and distributed systems design - most recently in "The ThoughtWorks Anthology" (Pragmatic Programmers, 2008). He is currently co-authoring a book, "REST in Practice: Hypermedia and Systems Architecture", to be published by O’Reilly in 2010.

Erfaring som programmerer, prosjektleder og gruppe leder i Telenor og Storebrand. Forsker ved Simula Research Laboratory og professor ved Universitetet i Oslo.

Morten er utdannet sivilingeniør i datateknikk fra NTNU og jobber som systemutvikler i Iterate AS.

Tobias er fagsjef i Know IT Objectnet. Han har 12 års erfaring fra konsulentbransjen hvor han stort sett har jobbet med utvikling av store mellomvareløsninger implementert i Java. Tobias er tidligere styremedlem i javaBin og satt i JavaZones programkomite fra 2004-2009. Tre av disse årene fungerte han som leder. Tobias har tidligere hold foredrag på javaBin, JavaZone, goOpen og rOOts.

Jevgeni Kabanov is the founder and lead of ZeroTurnaround (www.zeroturnaround.com), a development tools company that focuses on productivity. Before that he worked as the R&D director of Webmedia, Ltd, the largest custom software development company in the Baltics. As part of the effort to reduce development time tunraround he wrote the prototype of the ZeroTurnaround flagship product, JavaRebel, a class reloading JVM plugin. Jevgeni has been speaking at international conferences for several years, including JavaPolis/Devoxx, JavaZone, JAOO and so on. He also has an active research interest, publishing several papers on topics ranging from category theoretical notions to typesafe Java DSLs. Besides the commercial products made for ZeroTurnaround, Jevgeni is a co-founder of two open-source projects -- Aranea and Squill. Aranea (www.araneaframework.org) is a web development and integration platform based on strong object-oriented principles. Squill (squill.dev.java.net) is a typesafe internal DSL for constructing and executing SQL queries. Jevgeni's personal blog can be found at dow.ngra.de.

Alex Snaps is a software engineer at Terracota Inc. Before working on the Terracotta platform and product line, he participated in medium to large projects as coach, development lead and architect. He speaks about Java development at events such as JavaOne, JavaPolis, Devoxx, Jazoon or XP Days. He is the lead developer on the JTA development of Ehcache.

Fredrik Vraalsen received an M.Sc. degree from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign in 2001 and has over 10 years of experience as a software developer working with J2EE, Swing client applications and Java/C++ on mobile devices. After graduating he was as a researcher and developer at SINTEF for 5 years with a focus on software development methodology, mobile systems and model-based security analysis. Currently he is a Java developer/consultant at Know IT Objectnet, where he does design and development on a large sales back-end system and client application for NSB. He is also a Scala enthusiast and co-founder of scalaBin and has also been a member of the JavaZone programme committee for two years.

Thomas Pronstad jobber til daglig som konsulent hos Itera Consulting, og er utdannet Sivilingeniør i datateknikk fra NTNU. Thomas arbeider til daglig som systemutvikler på et prosjekt som PCI-sertifiseres. Gjennom siste års spesialisering innen sikkerhet og PCI-sertifiseringen har han tilegnet seg kunnskap om teoretisk og praktisk sikkerhet innen for web applikasjoner. Thomas interesserer seg for systemer, sikkerhet og hvordan man mest effektivt kan sikre dem.

Erik Bakstad er utdannet Master IKT ved Universitetet i Bergen, og jobber som konsulent i Miles AS. Han har jobbet med Java EE siden 2007 og har god erfaring med teknologien. Han er spesielt interessert i smidige metoder og praksiser, søk og open-source.

Jeff Genender is a Java Champion and Java Open Source consultant specializing in SOA and enterprise service implementations. He is the author of Professional Apache Tomcat 6, Professional Apache Geronimo, and Enterprise Java Servlets as well as an Apache member and committer on several open source projects including ServiceMix, CXF, Geronimo, OpenEJB, ServiceMix, Mina, and Open Terracotta. Jeff serves on the JSR-316 Java EE6 expert group committee.

Bjarte er en engasjert og utadvent person som liker å leke med ny teknologi. For tiden er det Scala, Android og Node.js som er hovedinteressene. Bjarte jobber som seniorkonsulent hos Know IT Objectnet.

Morten har jobbet som utvikler og arkitekt i 18 år på ulike plattformer (Java, Microsoft .NET, MVS/Cobol) og jobber for konsulentselskapet Miles. De siste 6 årene har han jobbet som utvikler og arkitekt i Java-prosjekter basert på Java SE, Spring, Hibernate og Maven. Han mener at utvikling er et håndverk som må læres og vedlikeholdes, og at kompleksitet er et onde som bør bekjempes.

Prosjektleder for data.norge.no, Fornyingsdepartementet.
NTO, Microsoft Norge.
Prosjektleder IKT, Teknologirådet.
Senior Consultant, Itera Consulting og initiativtaker til Oslo Open Data Forum.
Prosjektdirektør, IKT Norge.

Markuz jobber til daglig som senior konsulent på Objectware innenfor Java avdelningen. Han har drevet med systemarkitektur for Volvo og bankvesenet. På fritiden driver han med iPhone OS og Mac OS X utvikling. Han har siden tidligere lang erfaring innenfor Apple-verden.

Filip van Laenen is a Chief Engineer at Computas AS, which supplies IT solutions to the public and the private sector in Norway. He has over 10 years of experience in the software industry, from being a developer in both small and large teams to being the lead developer and compentency leader for security and software engineering for the whole company. In his professional career he has used a number of programming languages, including Smalltalk, Java, Perl, Ruby, and PL/SQL. He has a special interest in computer security and cryptography, and held the position of Chief Security Officer at Computas for a number of years. Filip holds a M.Sc. in Electronics and a M.Sc. in Computer Science from the KULeuven. He comes originally from Flanders, but moved to Norway in 1997 and now lives with his family in Kolsås near Oslo.

Tom is the author of nine books, and hundreds of papers on these and related subjects. His latest book ‘Competitive Engineering’ is a substantial definition of requirements ideas. His ideas on requirements are the acknowledged basis for CMMI level 4 (quality quantification, as initially developed at IBM from 1980). Tom has guest lectured at universities all over UK, Europe, China, India, USA, Korea – and has been a keynote speaker at dozens of technical conferences internationally. Tom has consulted with Citigroup, and Credit Suisse both of which have adopted some of his methods successfully. He also has had substantial documented adoption of his methods at Boeing, HP, IBM, Philips Medical, Ericsson, Nokia, Siemens, Schlumberger, Sony, Qualcomm, Microsoft and many more. He invented the concept of Software Metrics (1976, book), and is widely cited as the pioneer of the Agile rapid development cycle (Principles of Sw Eng. Mgt", 1988. His own agile method, the original one - is called 'Evo'. It is successfully used as a front end to Scrum. See www.Gilb.com for more detail.
Kai Gilb worked with Tom since 1990 broadens the scope (example, expanding from product focus to Stakeholders) & focusing on essential fundamentals written the Evo Project Management book manuscript, see ww.gilb.com

Alf Kristian har 6 års praktisk erfaring med utvikling i store og små Java prosjekter. De siste årene har hovedinteressen vært nyere funksjonelle språk på JVM'en som Scala og Clojure, da han mener at Java som språk ikke er egnet til å møte framtidens utfordringer. Alf Kristian jobber som seniorkonsulent hos Know IT Objectnet.

Anders Sandvig er en pragmatisk programmerer og problemløser med sans for elegante og smidige løsninger. Med bred erfaring fra flere bransjer som teknisk prosjektleder, systemarkitekt og systemutvikler har han god kjennskap til ulike utfordringer ved utvikling av virksomhetskritiske, distribuerte systemer med høye krav til stabilitet, sikkerhet, ytelse og skalérbarhet. Anders har jobbet profesjonelt som utvikler i over ti år og er i dag ansatt som seniorkonsulent hos Webstep i Oslo.

Gojko Adzic is a software craftsman with a passion for new technologies, programming and writing. He is the author of several books and online guides on acceptance testing, including Bridging the Communication Gap, Test Driven .NET Development with Fitnesse, and Getting Fit with .NET, and more than 200 articles about programming, operating systems, the Internet and new technologies published in various online and print magazines.

Anders is a solutions architect working for Steria Norway with more than ten years of Java project experience. Anders is happiest when he can able to make simple and understandable solutions to complex problems.
Johannes is an experienced Java developer and architecture working for Steria Norway. For the first several years as a Java-programmer, he tried to find a good web framework. Finally, he decided to learn what it takes to construct a web application without a web framework, just so he could see what work the frameworks were helping him with. He's never looked back. Johannes has been practicing test-driven development for ten years. He finds the practice hard, especially with new designs and patterns. As a result, whenever he runs across a problem that's difficult to test, he works on it repeatedly until he finds a good way to test it - a kata.

While Kris-Mikael is primarily a java developer working at Objectware, he has a strong fascination for eliciting the strength of programming languages and their available derivations. He means that doing so makes us able to unleash the true power from the software we write. Kris-Mikael loves the Ruby programming language and is utilizing its beautiful design to point out the importance of aesthetics in source code.

Matthew McCullough is an energetic 14 year veteran of enterprise software development, open source education, and co-founder of Ambient Ideas, LLC, a Denver consultancy. Matthew currently is a member of the JCP, reviewer for technology publishers including O'Reilly, author of the upcoming Presentation Patterns & Anti-Patterns book, multi-year speaker on the No Fluff Just Stuff tour, author of the DZone Maven, Git & Google App Engine RefCards, and President of the Denver Open Source Users Group. His experience includes successful JEE, SOA, and Web Service implementations for real estate, finance and telecommunications firms in addition to publishing several open source libraries. Matthew jumps at opportunities to mentor and educate teams on how to leverage open source. His current topics of R&D are Cloud Computing, Service Integrations, Maven, Git, and Hadoop. Matthew resides in Denver with his beautiful wife and 1.5 year old daughter, who are active in nearly every outdoor activity Colorado offers.

Thor Åge Eldby jobber i Arktekk og har 15 års utviklererfaring. De siste ti av dem på Java med det meste fra front-ender på web og håndholdte enheter og bakover til store bakendesystem. Han har i løpet av årene fått en sterk forkjærlighet for åpen kildekode, lettvektsarkitekturer og smidige utviklingsmetoder.

Øyvind Thoresen er en rådgiver som er brennede opptatt av ny og morderne arkitektur samt at han besitter en solid bakgrunn fra realisering avarkitekturprosjekter og datavarehus og besitter sterk teknisk innsikt både på overordnet og detaljnivå, samt bred innsikt innen mange områder relatert til IT fra mange år i bransjen. Øyvind har en solid erfaring innen : • Databasearkitektur og databaseteknologi • Datakvalitet • Harmonisering • Standardisering • Konvertering • Migrering • Teknologianskaffelser • Drift outsourcing • Mobilteknologi • Sikkerhet

Trond Arve Wasskog er utvikler og CTO i Bekk Consulting. Han har jobbet med Java og Java EE applikasjonsutvikling i mer enn ti år, med fokus på smidig utvikling, kvalitet og vedlikeholdbarhet.

Bio: Angelika Langer works as an independent trainer with a curriculum of Java and C++ courses. She enjoys speaking at conferences all over the world, including JavaOne, OOPLSA, JAX and ACCU to name a few. Her teaching focuses on advanced C++ and Java programming, concurrency, and performance tuning. She is coäauthor of a column named "Effective Java" published in the German magazine JavaMagazin and author of the Java Generics FAQs online. Further information can be found at http://www.AngelikaLanger.com.

Senior solution architect and Operations Director, having joined Lunatech Research in 2004. Peter works on web application architecture, design and construction, with technical project management. He also does sales, marketing and recruitment work. His interests include Java web application frameworks, agile software development process and practices, and web-based collaboration. Since 2010, Peter has been a committer on the Play framework open-source project.
Nicolas Leroux is a senior architect and Technical Director at Lunatech, having joined in 2001. Nicolas is an expert early adopter of the Java Enterprise platform as well as the open-source technologies that gravitate around it. He applies this experience and technical expertise of the middleware platform on Lunatech's projects and for Lunatech's clients Nicolas is also an open source enthousiast and more specifically a Java enthusiast. He is the co-founder of the Benelux JBoss User Group and the Riviera Java User Group . He also contributes to the open source frameworks he uses by committing patches. Since 2009, Nicolas has had a passion for the Play framework and is now a core developer of its open-source project.

Johannes Brodwall is a Chief Scientist at Steria. He teaches architecture and development to Sterias developers and acts as lead architect on large projects. He’s interested in fostering a culture of improve in the software development community and organizes the popular Oslo XP meetup as well as the annual Smidig conferences in Oslo. He is opinionated and occasionally annoying, and has been so at the last ten JavaZone conferences. In 2006, he gave a talk entitled "Why I hate SOA". He no longer hates SOA.

Justin has been an active Java developer since 1996. He has worked on projects ranging from Web applications to systems integration. He has spoken internationally and at local user groups and is an active member of the open source community. For the last few years, he has been a member of the GlassFish and Grizzly teams where he works on the Web tier team. Justin is also a contributor to The Basement Coders Podcast.

Jeg er en Kodemaker som har programmert siden Sharp MZ-721 var den kuleste datamaskinen man kunne ha på et gutterom (for den kom med kassettspiller, og vi kunne kopiere spill med pappas dobbelkassettspiller). Det var da spill kom i form av lange listinger i blader, som vi tastet inn, og det fantes kommandoer som het PEEK og POKE. For tiden er jeg konsulent i et stort, skikkelig morsomt, norsk firma.

Peder Søholt jobber i Miles og har 5 års erfaring fra konsulentbransjen, hovedsakelig fra stat, telekom og mediebransjen. Peder utvikler i både Java og .NET alt ettersom hva som passer prosjektet best og påtar seg rollen som scrummaster. Ellers påtar han seg rollen som coach, uten at noen vet det med sine egenlærte metoder.

Nils Christian nyter å hjelpe team å levere software som gleder både brukere og sponsorer. Som konsulent er han å finne i ulike roller hvor han får praktisert dette gjennom coaching i smidig test- og utviklingsmetodikk, kravspesifisering, systemarkitektur og utvikling. Nils Christian er sivilingeniør fra NTNU og partner i Scienta AS.
Stein er en arkitekt/rådgiver som ønsker å bidra til at kunden får størst mulig avkastning på sine IT-investeringer. Hans fagområder inkluderer estimering/usikkerhetsanalyser, kravspesifisering, modellering og systemarkitektur. Stein har en doktorgrad i Software Engineering fra Universitetet i Oslo, og er partner i Scienta AS.

Benjamin is one of only 40 Certified Scrum Coaches in the world, and the only Norwegian. He has extensive experience coaching teams and organisations to successful agile adoption. Benjamin is also member of the International Coach Federation. He in international partner of agile42 a specialist agile coaching company. You can also follow our blog www.scrummaster.no or twitter @benjaminsommer Telefon: 95 24 28 95 Skype: benjamin_sommer_ benjamin.sommer@agile42.com

Senior Consultant at Capgemini Norway. Working as a developer and maintainer of Java Enterprise systems in the Finance Sector.

Glenn Bech leder Inmeta Consulting sin Javaavdeling og jobber samtidig som konsulent, hands-on i utviklingsprosjekter. Han har jobbet med Java i over 10 år med fokus på serverside utvikling primært i prosjekter innen Bank og forsikring. Glenn tok entusiastisk opp Android utvikling i starten av 2011 og har flere publiserte Android applikasjoner.

Bio: Angelika Langer works as an independent trainer with a curriculum of Java and C++ courses. She enjoys speaking at conferences all over the world, including JavaOne, OOPLSA, JAX and ACCU to name a few. Her teaching focuses on advanced C++ and Java programming, concurrency, and performance tuning. She is coäauthor of a column named "Effective Java" published in the German magazine JavaMagazin and author of the Java Generics FAQs online. Further information can be found at http://www.AngelikaLanger.com.

Kenneth er konsulent hos Accenture og har jobbet i flere ulike roller i Pensjonsprogrammet i NAV, sist som leder for det teamet som vedlikeholder alle test- og utviklingsmiljøer for programmet. Med høy endringstakt og så mange miljøer, servere og applikasjoner å holde orden på har det vært essensielt å automatisere alt som kan automatiseres. Her har Nagios vært en nyttig brikke i puslespillet og gjort det mulig å drive hurtig feilsøking og holde brukerne oppdatert på status i miljøene. Før han kom til Accenture har Kenneth jobbet i over 6 år i et lite norsk selskap som utvikler løsninger for lagring over internett. Her ble også Nagios med stort hell brukt til overvåkning av alle test- og utviklingsmiljøer, i tillegg til selve produksjonsmiljøet.

Anders er seniorkonsulent hos Miles AS. Han har over 6 års erfaring fra store og små prosjekter innenfor mange bransjer. Gjennom forskjellige roller i prosjekter har han fått solid erfaring med smidige prosesser, Java EE, TDD, databaser, integrasjon og objektorientert design. Han brenner for smidige prosesser og enkel, endringsdyktig kode som gir maksimalt med verdi for organisasjonen.
Truls er fagansvarlig for Java i Capgemini Norge. Han har erfaring med utvikling, funksjonell design og teknisk arkitektur fra riktig store til ganske små prosjekter. Truls mener at smidig utviklingsmetodikk er den rette vei, at Domain Driven Design og Test Driven Development er mye mer enn fengende fraser med tilhørende kule forkortelser, at Pearl Jam er verdens beste band, at løsninger for mobile enheter vil være sentrale i mange bedrifters IT-planer fremover, og at Open Source kommer til å vinne til slutt.

Har under de siste fem årene arbeidet med Javabaserte kontollsystemer for videokonferansesystem (telepresence) på Cisco (tidligere TANDBERG). Har tidligere utviklet kamerabasert maskin og programvare for geometriske målesystemer (Metronor).

Aslak Hellesøy is a senior developer in DRW Trading in London. Aslak is a published author and frequent speaker about agile, open source and new, cool technology. He has contributed to dozens of open source projects and is the creator of Cucumber (http://cukes.info/)

Markus Krüger works as architect and software developer at EDB ErgoGroup AS, one of the largest Norwegian software companies offering operations, solutions, and consultancy services. Markus has 11 years experience in the software industry, working with various technologies and environments, including Java EE the last 6 years. He has previously held talks on various subjects such as version control, object relational mapping (ORM), performance testing, and Java EE scheduling and concurrency.

Trygve Lie has worked professionally with web development since 1997 and mainly focused on web–technologies like HTML, CSS and JavaScript. He has got a background from companies such as sol.no, Escenic (where he's worked for web sites like Telenor, Danmarks Radio, Aftenposten, De Telegraph, The Sun etc), nrk.no and A–Pressen Nye Medier. Trygve has also co–organizing front–end related meet–up with Framsia and hosts talks on several web related topics for both the public and companies.

Developer with quite a few languages under his belt, but with a passion for the dynamic ones. Working 9 to 5 on online media solutions for APDM in Oslo. Working evenings on becoming a better ruby developer and mountain bike rider.

Andreas Hegna is a Master of Science / Graduate in communications technology from NTNU with specialization in information security and he works as a Security Consultant for Watchcom Security Group. Since his employment he has taken part in security audits and has been a speaker at various seminars and presentations on topics such as security in mobile phones, security in social media and visualization of security data / botnets.

Martijn Dashorst is a software engineer working at Topicus delivering web applications for schools, colleges and universities in the Netherlands. He is active in the Apache Wicket community and wrote Wicket in Action for the web framework. He has spoken at several conferences about Wicket including JavaOne, Devoxx, Fosdem and TheServerSide Java Symposium. When not earning bread and butter he gets sleep deprived in the Netherlands together with his awesome wife and 2 year old son.

Mattias spends most of his time working with software development in the financial sector as well as leading a Java User Group in Stockholm, Sweden. Mattias has worked with OO software development since 1993. Through the years he has gained experience from many different roles, including developer, architect, team leader, coach, manager, and teacher. In these roles he receives consistent feedback about his ability to inspire and motivate the people he works with. The JUG holds six to eight fully booked meetings per year with more then 200 participants at every meeting. Mattias is also one of the organizers behind Jfokus. Jfokus is the largest Java-focused annual conference in Stockholm. In his spare time, Mattias can be found playing with his children or riding his motorcycle, as well as changing underprivileged people's lives by building houses with Habitat for Humanity. Mattias also supports Kiva, a person to person micro-loan organization. Join his effort to improve the world at http://www.kiva.org/team/jug.

Sr. Java/Groovy Developer, Groovy and CodeNarc Committer Hamlet D'Arcy has been writing software for over a decade, and has spent considerable time coding in C++, Java, and Groovy. He's passionate about learning new languages and different ways to think about problems. Hamlet is the founder of the Basel-based Hackergarten open source coding group, and regularly participates and speaks at local and international user groups and conferences. Hamlet is a committer on the Groovy and CodeNarc projects, and is a contributor on a few other open source projects (including JConch and the IDEA Groovy Plugin). He blogs regularly at http://hamletdarcy.blogspot.com and can be found on Twitter as HamletDRC (http://twitter.com/hamletdrc).

Agile coach.

Tor Magne Lindeberg is a consultant at EDB ErgoGroup and has six years experience working with application integration.

Jostein har jobbet med Java og sikkerhet i 7 år. Han har et stort ønske om at alle Java-utviklere skal tenke over hvordan koden de skrev i dag kan utnyttes av en ondsinnet hacker i morgen. Han ønsker også et større fokus på sikkerhet i Java-verden. Til daglig jobber Jostein som Senior Software Engineer hos Steria.

Sivilingeniør kommunikasjonsteknologi fra NTNU med mobilutvikling og mobile plattformer som interessefelt. Jobber som utvikler på Android og iPhone hos Giant Leap Technologies.

Kevlin is an independent consultant and trainer based in the UK. His development interests are in patterns, programming, practice and process. He has been a columnist for various magazines and web sites, including Better Software, The Register, Application Development Advisor, Java Report and the C/C++ Users Journal. Kevlin is co-author of A Pattern Language for Distributed Computing and On Patterns and Pattern Languages, two volumes in the Pattern-Oriented Software Architecture series. He is also editor of the 97 Things Every Programmer Should Know site and book.

Jeg er en Kodemaker som startet å programmere da jeg var 10, og faren min kom hjem med en C64. Framsieutvikling har jeg holdt på med siden 1999, da JavaScript gjemte seg under navnet DHTML og asynkrone serverkall ble gjort i en skjult iframe. Jeg har skrevet mye JavaScript siden den gang, og jo eldre det blir jo mer smerter det meg å lese koden i dag. Det må jo bety at jeg har lært et og annet. En av de tingene jeg har lært vil jeg vise deg i dag.

Daniel Spiewak is a software developer based out of Wisconsin, USA. Over the years, he has worked with Java, Scala, Ruby, C/C++, ML, Clojure and several experimental languages. He currently spends most of his free time researching parser theory and methodologies, particularly areas where the field intersects with functional language design, domain-specific languages and type theory. Daniel has written a number of articles on his weblog, Code Commit, including his popular introductory series, Scala for Java Refugees.

Software developer at Steria with > 10 years of programming behind her in all sorts of projects, mostly within the oil industry.

Best described as a Generalising Specialist, Patrick Kua works as an agile practitioner, coach and technical leader for ThoughtWorks London. His interests focus on blending excellence in technical and team aspects, drawing upon agile practices to help align business and IT capabilities. He is particularly passionate about continuous improvement, learning and is a deeply experience presenter and workshop facilitator, having presented at variety of conferences including Javazone, Agile North, the XP200x series of conferences, Agile 2009, QCon London, & Oredev.

Anders is a solutions architect working for Steria Norway with more than ten years of Java project experience. He’s dedicated to create simple solutions to complex problems, and is always searching for frameworks that can help him achive just that. He also working on increasing his coding velocity. He tries to achive that working with diffent code katas and solve

Open Source Application Architect at Ambient Ideas Matthew McCullough is an energetic 12 year veteran of enterprise software development, open source education, and co-founder of Ambient Ideas, LLC, a Denver consultancy. He is an outspoken advocate for the use of open source libraries in enterprise applications. Matthew currently is a member of the JCP, reviewer for technology publishers including O'Reilly, President of the Denver Open Source Users Group, and speaker on the No Fluff Just Stuff 2009 tour. His experience includes successful J2EE, SOA, and Web Service implementations for real estate, financial management, and telecommunications firms, and development of several open source libraries. Matthew jumps at opportunities to evangelize, present, and educate teams on the benefits of open source. His current focuses are Maven, iPhone and Android applications, and OSS debugging tools. Matthew currently resides in beautiful Denver, Colorado, USA with his wife and baby daughter, who all are active in nearly every outdoor activity Colorado offers.

Tim is a full-stack generalist and passionate teacher who loves coding, presenting, and working with people. He is founder and principal software developer at the August Technology Group, a technology consulting firm focused on the JVM. He is a speaker internationally and on the No Fluff Just Stuff tour in the United States, and is co-president of the Denver Open Source User Group. He has recently been exploring non-relational data stores, continuous deployment, and how software architecture should resemble an ant colony. He lives in Littleton with the wife of his youth and their three children.

Stian Grenborgen jobber som Javaprogrammerer og systemarkitekt i Nets. Gjennom arbeid med flere sentrale systemer i Nets, har han sett på hvordan systemgrensesnitt av forskjellige typer kan utvikles bakover- og fremoverkompatibelt.

Rune har 4 års erfaring som utvikler, hvorav alle i BEKK Consulting i ulike Java-prosjekter. Foruten stor interesse for hvilke muligheter som (fremdeles) ligger i Java som språk, trives han godt med oppsett av bygging, testing, og prosjektstruktur og -arkitektur.

Tor-Erik jobber i dag som utviklingsleder for et større smidig prosjekt. Han har informatikkutdannelse fra UiO og har jobbet for Accenture siden 2004 både som javautvikler, teknisk arkitekt, scrum master og nå som utviklingsleder. Som utviklingsleder har han spesielt fokus på hvordan teamene jobber og hvordan disse kan forbedre seg.

I'm a Java EE developer since 2005, working with IBM Austria, IBA CZ, and now Iterate Norway. I've worked on many different projects, often in enterprise environments with complex deployment structures and strict security, legal and other rules, serving hundreds of thousands of users. I've learned about code injection years ago when I started to work on extending, customizing, and maintaining a large, third-party, closed-source J2EE enterprise application. During the years I've found code injection to be indispensable for troubleshooting and for dealing with cross-cutting concerns like performance monitoring in an elegant way, both on this J2EE project and many others. My primary interests are code quality, application performance, and ease of development, including the golden rule Don't Repeat Yourself - one of the reasons why I appreciate code injection. I share my technical endeavors and experience reports at my blog http://theholyjava.wordpress.com/ and you can also find some of the articles at DZone.

Espen works for Cisco Systems with product development and architecture. He has been involved in introducing technology (like Java and .Net) and works daily the challenge of using technology to build improved technology to benefit the users.

Nathaniel T. Schutta is a senior software engineer focussed on making usable applications. A proponent of polyglot programming, Nate has written two books on Ajax and speaks regularly at various No Fluff Just Stuff symposia, universities, and Java user groups. In addition to his day job, Nate is an adjunct professor at the University of Minnesota where he teaches students to embrace dynamic languages.

Bodil spends her days working as a Java developer at Steria, while silently plotting to overthrow the ancien régime, replacing current programming fashions with the Next Big Thing. She hopes the Next Big Thing will have lots of parentheses, but will settle for anything without checked exceptions. She is on intimate terms with JavaScript and the web platform, having been the lead JavaScript developer on Scandinavia's biggest web based mapping application -- kart.gulesider.no and friends -- and has since taken an active interest in CoffeeScript and Node.JS as worthy challengers to the Ruby on Rails hegemony. After discovering CoffeeScript, she has almost completely stopped cutting herself.

Mark Fisher is an engineer within the SpringSource division of VMware and lead of the Spring Integration team. He is also a committer on the core Spring Framework, co-lead of the Spring AMQP project, and a contributor of messaging support to the Spring BlazeDS Integration project. Mark is a frequent speaker at conferences and user groups in North America and Europe, and along with other Spring Integration committers, is an author of the forthcoming book, "Spring Integration in Action" to be published by Manning.

Arne Jervell er CTO i Giant Leap Technologies og har 14 års erfaring med Java. Han brenner for stadig forbedring og trives best i smidige prosjekter. Gjennom prosjektet TaxiStation har han opparbeidet seg kunnskaper og erfaringer med Windows Azure og hvordan samspillet mellom Azure og Java fungerer i praksis.

Erlend is a software consultant and a passionate developer. His technical interests revolve around HTTP, REST, and functional programming. In his spare time he is the Chairman of javaBin (Java brukerforening i Norge) and he is also the lead developer and architect behind the open source HTTP-cache library HTTPCache4j.

Neal Ford is Software Architect and Meme Wrangler at ThoughtWorks, a global IT consultancy with an exclusive focus on end-to-end software development and delivery. He is also the designer and developer of applications, instructional materials, magazine articles, courseware, video/DVD presentations, and author and/or editor of 6 books spanning a variety of technologies, including the most recent The Productive Programmer. He focuses on designing and building of large-scale enterprise applications. He is also an internationally acclaimed speaker, speaking at over 100 developer conferences worldwide, delivering more than 600 talks. Check out his web site at http://www.nealford.com. He welcomes feedback and can be reached at nford@thoughtworks.com.

Software Engineer and JRebel Product Lead at ZeroTurnaround. http://linkd.in/aarhipov

Adrian founded the open source jclouds multi-cloud library 2 years ago, and is also a committer to Apache Whirr. His recent efforts include vCloud ecosystem engineering at VMware, Java integration at Opscode, and cloud portability efforts at Cloudsoft. Adrian's currently consulting under Cloud Conscious LLC, which fuels jclouds considerably.

Eivind Mølster jobber som konsulent hos Steria innen brukervennlighet og design.. Før dette arbeidet han som interaksjonsdesigner hos Making Waves. Han har bred erfaring både med kommersielle nettsider til komplekse og forretningskritiske applikasjoner. Eivind har jobbet for kunder som SAS, Utdanningsdirektoratet, NAF og Statnett.

Has coded Java, C#, Javascript and Smalltalk in a variety of different tools, long term IntelliJ user and pragmatic programmer to the bone. Apache Maven committer/PMC, Selenium committer. Works as a consultant for Zenior AS.

Eivind Uggedal er seniorkonsulent i BEKK. Han er bidragsyter til flere kjente opensource-prosjekter. Han står blant annet også bak siter som wasitup.com og mediaqueri.es. Har flere års erfaring med drift av web-løsninger med høy trafikk. Han interesserer seg spesielt for for tiden for DevOps, Go og distribuerte systemer.
Ole Christian er utvikler og leder faggruppen for Dynamiske språk i BEKK. Han deltar også i JavaZones programkomite og er aktiv i fagmiljøet i Oslo. Han interesserer seg for tiden spesielt for programmeringsspråk, deriblant spesielt Scala, Clojure og Ruby for tiden.

Espen Herseth Halvorsen jobber som konsulent i Bekk Consulting, og jobber til daglig med utviklingen av Digipost. I den siste tiden har han jobbet spesielt mye med REST-grensesnittet til Digipost, og hatt ansvar for sikkerheten til dette API'et. Tidligere har han også vært ansvarlig for sikkerhets- og ytelsestesting på prosjektet. Espen er en aktiv bidragsyter i BEKKs javamiljø, og har aktivt bidratt på open source-prosjekter i nærmere 10 år.

Staffan Nöteberg is the author of the popular productivity book Pomodoro Technique Illustrated. He spent the recent decades as a freelance software developer, he's an internationally acclaimed conference speaker, and he also helped several companies to start with agile and lean. He lives in Stockholm and Istanbul. Staffan had a very personal Regex article published in the February 2011 issue of Pragmatic Programmers monthly magazine PragPub: http://pragprog.com/magazines/2011-02/de-morgan-to-the-rescue

Nathaniel T. Schutta is a senior software engineer focussed on making usable applications. A proponent of polyglot programming, Nate has written two books on Ajax and speaks regularly at various No Fluff Just Stuff symposia, universities, and Java user groups. In addition to his day job, Nate is an adjunct professor at the University of Minnesota where he teaches students to embrace dynamic languages.
Neal Ford is Software Architect and Meme Wrangler at ThoughtWorks, a global IT consultancy with an exclusive focus on end-to-end software development and delivery. He is also the designer and developer of applications, instructional materials, magazine articles, courseware, video/DVD presentations, and author and/or editor of 6 books spanning a variety of technologies, including the most recent The Productive Programmer. He focuses on designing and building of large-scale enterprise applications. He is also an internationally acclaimed speaker, speaking at over 100 developer conferences worldwide, delivering more than 600 talks. Check out his web site at http://www.nealford.com. He welcomes feedback and can be reached at nford@thoughtworks.com.
Open Source Application Architect at Ambient Ideas Matthew McCullough is an energetic 12 year veteran of enterprise software development, open source education, and co-founder of Ambient Ideas, LLC, a Denver consultancy. He is an outspoken advocate for the use of open source libraries in enterprise applications. Matthew currently is a member of the JCP, reviewer for technology publishers including O'Reilly, President of the Denver Open Source Users Group, and speaker on the No Fluff Just Stuff 2009 tour. His experience includes successful J2EE, SOA, and Web Service implementations for real estate, financial management, and telecommunications firms, and development of several open source libraries. Matthew jumps at opportunities to evangelize, present, and educate teams on the benefits of open source. His current focuses are Maven, iPhone and Android applications, and OSS debugging tools. Matthew currently resides in beautiful Denver, Colorado, USA with his wife and baby daughter, who all are active in nearly every outdoor activity Colorado offers.

James Ward (www.jamesward.com) is a Pricipal Developer Evangelist at salesforce.com. Today he focuses on teaching developers about running Java on the Cloud. James frequently presents at conferences around the world such as JavaOne, Devoxx, and many other Java get-togethers. Along with Bruce Eckel, James co-authored First Steps in Flex. He has also published numerous screencasts, blogs, and technical articles. Starting with Pascal and Assembly in the 80′s, James found his passion for writing code. Beginning in the 90′s he began doing web development with HTML, Perl/CGI, then Java. After building a Flex and Java based customer service portal in 2004 for Pillar Data Systems he became a Technical Evangelist for Flex at Adobe. You can find him tweeting as @_JamesWard, answering questions on StackOverflow.com and posting code at github.com/jamesward.

Jonas Bonér is a entrepreneur, programmer, teacher, mentor, speaker, author and Java Champion who spends most of his time hacking on open source and lecturing and speaking at developer conferences world-wide. He has worked at Terracotta, the JRockit JVM at BEA and is an active contributor to the Open Source community; most notably created the Akka Project, AspectWerkz Aspect-Oriented Programming (AOP) framework, committer to the Terracotta JVM clustering technology and been part of the Eclipse AspectJ team. He blogs occasionally at: http://jonasboner.com

Trond Marius jobber som seniorkonsulent og fagleder i Mesan. Han har lang erfaring med Javabasert systemutvikling, og har følt på kroppen hva som går bra og mindre bra med JPA. De siste årene har han fulgt Scala og har brukt språket i flere prosjekter. Trond Marius leter konstant etter effektive løsninger og ny teknologi som gjør hverdagen som utvikler enklere.

Jeg er en Kodemaker og som alle Kodemakere er jeg dypt engasjert i faget mitt. Jeg har jobbet med Java++ i ca 6 år og har erfaring fra både store og små prosjekter. Felles for alle har vært et ønske om å være testdrevne, men ikke helt fått det engasjement som skal til for å overbevise alle. Jeg søker derfor etter verktøy og metoder som gjør det enklere for alle involverte å forme det systemet kunden vil ha basert på TDD/BDD.

Tony Printezis is a Principle Member of Technical Staff at Oracle, based in Burlington, MA. He has been contributing to the Java HotSpot Virtual Machine since the beginning of 2006. Before that, he spent over 3 years at SunLabs. He spends most of his time working on dynamic memory management for the Java platform, concentrating on performance, scalability, responsiveness, parallelism, and visualisation of garbage collectors. He has also given several memory management-related talks at JavaOne and other forums. He obtained a PhD in 2000 and a BSc(Hons) in 1995, both from the University of Glasgow in Scotland.

Kenneth jobber i Know IT Objectnet og har jobbet i konsulentbransjen siden 2004. Han har sin kjernekompetanse innenfor objektorientert utvikling av Java/JEE-løsninger. Kenneth har deltatt på mange store prosjekter, og flesteparten av dem innenfor telekom. Kenneth er for tiden engasjert hos Telenor mobil.
Steinar jobber som selvstendig konsulent i Steinar Haugen Consulting AS og som CTO i nyetablerte Technebies AS. Han har jobbet 14 år som konsulent og har programmert i nesten 30 år. De siste 10 årene har han hovedsaklig jobbet i telekom bransjen. Interessefeltet er bredt og spenner fra utvikling innen store mellomvare systemer, via GUI app'er og grafisk databehandling, til algoritmer og genetisk programmering. Han liker å lære nye språk. Den siste tiden har han jobbet med groovy og groovy-baserte rammeverk, samt utvikling av DSL'er innen groovy. Han har nylig jobbet med migrering av et stort byggesystem fra maven 1 til gradle.

Mike Keith has been an object-oriented programming, distributed systems and persistence expert for over 20 years. He co-lead the expert group that produced the first release of the JPA and co-authored the premier JPA reference book, Pro EJB 3: Java Persistence API, followed up with Pro JPA 2: Mastering the Java Persistence API. He works at Oracle as a Java architect and has represented Oracle on numerous expert groups and specifications.

Timothy Perrett is a UK based developer, technologist and author of Lift in Action, the book about Scala Lift. Having worked in and around manufacturing and workflow systems for over seven years, he has wealth of experience building machine automation and writing system integration middleware. Timothy is an active committer on the Lift project and has been for the past three years.

Stein Magnus Jodal er utdannet sivilingeniør i datateknikk fra NTNU. Han har jobbet som konsulent i Iterate siden 2009, hvor han har erfaring fra utviklingsprosjekter i Java, Python og Ruby. Stein Magnus er interessert i bl.a. kodekvalitet, funksjonell programmering og concurrency. På fritiden er han en aktiv deltager i fagmiljøet i Oslo og bidragsyter til Open Source-prosjekter.

IT konsulent som for tiden jobber for Know IT i Kristiansand. Interessert i funksjonell programmering, alternative språk på jvm, javascript, ux, ren kode.

Simon Ritter is a Java Technology Evangelist at Oracle Corporation. Simon has been in the IT business since 1984 and holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Physics from Brunel University in the U.K. Originally working in the area of UNIX development for AT&T UNIX System Labs and then Novell, Simon moved to Sun in 1996. At this time he started working with Java technology and has spent time working both in Java technology development and consultancy. Having moved to Oracle as part of the Sun acquisition he now specialises in looking at emerging technologies including cloud computing, wireless sensor networks, and gestural interfaces.

Paul King leads ASERT, an organization based in Brisbane, Australia which provides software development, training and mentoring services to customers wanting to embrace new technologies, harness best practices and innovate. He has been contributing to open source projects for nearly 20 years and is an active committer on numerous projects including Groovy. Paul speaks at international conferences, publishes in software magazines and journals, and is a co-author of Manning's best-seller: Groovy in Action.

Joonas Lehtinen, PhD, is one of the core developers of Vaadin, a Java-based framework for building business-oriented Rich Internet Applications. Joonas has been developing applications for the web since 1995 with a strong focus on Ajax and Java. He is the founder and CEO of the company behind the Vaadin framework.

Programmer at heart through 10+ years of post-university system development profession. Agile Affectionado since signing the Agile Manifesto as signee #94 in 2001. Domain Driven Design enthusiast since 2004 when finding Eric Evans ideas well aligned with his own ideas about development. Nowadays working as mentor, coach, and architect insisting on code as the most central artifact. Partner of and official spokesperson for Omegapoint on architecture and development methodology. Co-author of "97 Things Every Programmer Should Know" and share his ideas in the blogosphere through his letters to a junior programmer under the title "Dear Junior".

Olve Maudal jobber for Cisco Systems Norway. Han elsker å skrive kode, men er kanskje like interessert i hvordan en gruppe mennesker utvikler god kode sammen som hva koden faktisk gjør. Han jobber nå med utvikling av videokonferansesystemer (TANDBERG ble kjøpt av Cisco i 2010). Tidligere erfaring inkluderer utvikling av systemer for å lete etter olje (Schlumberger) og utvikling av betalingssystemer (BBS, nå Nets). Olve er et aktivt medlem i geek-miljøet i Oslo hvor han blandt annet er aktivt med i JavaPils, Cantara, XP Meetup, Oslo C++ Users Group, Lean Meetup og andre ting. Han blogger på http://olvemaudal.wordpress.com and http://twitter.com/olvemaudal

Brendan McAdams, a software engineer at 10gen, explores the deeper relationship between the MongoDB database and various languages on the Java Virtual Machine such as Java, Scala, Clojure, JRuby and Python as well as the challenges posted getting MongoDB to play nice with these tools and their syntax.

Thomas Enebo has been a practitioner of Java for over a decade and he is the co-lead of the JRuby project. Thomas has also been happily using Ruby since 2001. In addition to working on JRuby, Tom is interested in improving the state of alternative languages on the Java Virtual Machine. Tom is employed working on JRuby full time at Engine Yard.

Stein Inge jobber i BEKK og spiller bass i BEKK Band, som spiller på Rockefeller under ClubZone. Han er teknisk prosjektleder for Digipost, Norges nye digitale postsystem, utviklet av Posten. Han er en smidig evangelist med mer enn 10 års erfaring i å bidra til, så vel som å hjelpe andre til å bli bedre til, å produsere fremragende programvare sammen med kunder med høye forventninger. Siste året har han presentert på Smidig og Roots.

Erik Bakstad er utdannet Master IKT ved Universitetet i Bergen, og jobber som konsulent i Miles AS. Han er glad i å lære nye teknologier, og er hele tiden på jakt etter nye faglige utfordringer. I tillegg til jobben som konsulent jobber han aktivt for å skape et godt fagmiljø i Bergen, gjennom blant annet Roots-konferansen og javabin.

Daniel Spiewak is a software developer based out of Wisconsin, USA. Over the years, he has worked with Java, Scala, Ruby, C/C++, ML, Clojure and several experimental languages. He currently spends most of his free time researching parser theory and methodologies, particularly areas where the field intersects with functional language design, domain-specific languages and type theory. Daniel has written a number of articles on his weblog, Code Commit, including his popular introductory series, Scala for Java Refugees.

Opinionated programmer with a beard at Arktekk Kaare Nilsen is a passionate programmer with more than 15 years of experience from projects in various industries, in both private and government sector. After all these years he is proud to still call himself a programmer. He firmly believes that architecture is important, in fact - way too important to be left to The Architects. Kaare is not afraid of letting his voice be heard, and often speaks about various programming and open source topics at meetups and conferences.

Børge er fagsjef for IT-rådgivning og Arkitektur i Bekk Consulting. Han har 16 års erfaring og har de siste årene primært jobbet med J2EE løsninger og da spesielt modernisering av gamle systemer.
Eirik jobber som manager i Bekk Consulting. Han har 6 års erfaring og har de siste årene jobbet med J2EE løsninger. De siste par årene har han vært med i et større moderniseringsprosjekt skrevet i J2EE med Apache Camel i bunn. Han brenner for ren og testbar kode.

Aslak Hellesøy is a senior developer in DRW Trading. Aslak is a published author and frequent speaker about agile, open source and new, cool technology. He has contributed to dozens of open source projects and is the creator of Cucumber

Opinionated programmer with a beard at Arktekk Kaare Nilsen is a passionate programmer with more than 15 years of experience from projects in various industries, in both private and government sector. After all these years he is proud to still call himself a programmer. He firmly believes that architecture is important, in fact - way too important to be left to The Architects. Kaare is not afraid of letting his voice be heard, and often speaks about various programming and open source topics at meetups and conferences.

Victor Grazi is Vice President of Application Development at Credit Suisse Client Technology Services/HOLT, and is also the creator of the Java Concurrent Animated open source project on SourceForge. He is a Java evangelist and has been building real time financial systems in Java since JDK version 1.02

27 år gammel Javautvikler, jobber med enterpriseløsninger for et større norsk firma til vanlig, driver med mye elektronikk på fritiden.

Morten er en selvutnevnt Springevangelist og har jobbet med Spring Batch siden det var i milestone i 2007 og presenterte det den gang på JavaZone. Morten prediker et pragmatisk syn på arkitektur og velger det enkle inntil det kan bevises at det ikke er godt nok...han venter ennå på et bevis på at man faktisk trenger en ESB...

Carl Quinn has been developing software professionally for 30 years, starting with BASIC on an Apple II, slogging through C/C++ on DOS, Windows and embedded, and finally landing in the Java on Linux world. The one thread through his career has been an inexplicable attraction to developer tools, spending time building them at Borland (C++ & Java IDEs), Sun (Java RAD), Google (Java & C++ build system) and most recently at Netflix (Java build and deployment automation). Carl also co-hosts the Java Posse podcast, the #1 ranked Java technology podcast.

John has been working in leading edge technology, mostly in investment banking and payments for well over 25 years. Working in 3 continents, moving from programmer to head of trading systems and head of technology at BNP Paribas to Global Head or Technical Architecture at JP Morgan. In 2000 John co-founded C24, the main product ?Integration Objects? (IO), a code-generator solved integration issues for investment banks, covering SWIFT, ISO-20022, FpML & FIX. C24 was sold to Nasdaq?s Iona Technologies in 2007 which was then sold to Progress Software a year later, John became the Technical Director in both cases. In early 2008 John co-founded Incept5, initially an incubator but now a medium-sized consulting company specialising in agile scaling of enterprise solutions, specifically investment banking and payments. Early clients included Revolution Money recently sold to Amex (now ?Serve.com?) and Verifi. More recently Incept5 has been working on a number of exciting projects from Skatteetaen (the Norwegian Tax office) to Visa Inc. in San Francisco. In 2010 Incept5 broke off a division into mobile iPhone and iPad apps, achieving first place in both categories and has now spun off ?i9? providing iPad solutions in the insurance industry. In April 2011 after working for some time with Progress, Incept5 reacquired C24 together with the blue-chip client base. C24 Integration Objects is now closely tied into Spring Integration as an enterprise integration solution. Between running a consultancy and two product companies John enjoys photography and travelling with his wife and 3 young boys.

Gojko Adzic is a software craftsman with a passion for new technologies, programming and writing. He has worked as a developer, architect, technical director and consultant on projects delivering equity and energy trading, mobile positioning, e-commerce, online gaming and complex configuration management. Gojko runs Neuri Ltd, a UK based consultancy that helps ambitious teams from web startups to large financial institutions implement specification by example and agile testing practices.

Danny Coward is a principal engineer and technology evangelist with Oracle corporation. He is been a contributor to all three of the Java platforms: Java SE, Java ME and Java EE, and created the foundation for the first JavaFX releases, and represents Oracle on the Executive Committee of the Java Community Process. He holds a phd in number theory from the University of Oxford.

Java Posse co-host
Java Posse co-host

Kent Beck is responsible for Extreme Programming, patterns for software development (with Ward Cunningham), test-driven development, and JUnit (with Erich Gamma). He currently researches software design with the Responsive Design Project and as Chief Scientist for Iterate AB.

senere..
later..

Johannes Brodwall is a Chief Scientist at Steria. He teaches architecture and development to Sterias developers and acts as lead architect on large projects. He’s interested in fostering a culture of improve in the software development community and organizes the popular Oslo XP meetup as well as the yearly Smidig conferences in Oslo. He is opinionated and occasionally annoying. He has been architect at some of the first projects in Norway to adopt Spring and is now architect at some of the first projects to reject Spring.

Josh Long is the Spring developer advocate for SpringSource, an editor on the Java queue for InfoQ.com, and the lead author on several books, including Apress' "Pro Spring Integration," and "Spring Recipes, 2nd Edition" Josh has spoken at many different industry conferences internationally including TheServerSide Java Symposium, SpringOne, Geecon, OSCON, JavaZone, Devoxx, Java2Days, SpringOne2GX, DreamForce, numerous Java User Groups worldwide, and many more. When he's not hacking on code for SpringSource, he can be found at the local Java User Group or at the local coffee shop. Josh likes solutions that push the boundaries of the technologies that enable them. His interests include scalability, BPM, big-data and grid processing, mobile computing and so-called "smart" systems. He blogs at SpringSource (http://blog.springsource.org) or http://www.joshlong.com. He's on Twitter, too, as @starbuxman.

Aslak Knutsen is currently a Senior Software Engineer for the JBoss Seam team at Red Hat, Inc. where he is the project lead for Arquillian and works on projects such as ShrinkWrap, Weld and Seam 3. Previously, Aslak was a Senior Consultant at Conduct AS (working with JBoss related technologies) and Senior Developer at EDB ASA (working with electronic billing/banking systems).
Advocate for and speaker on testable enterprise Java development, author of "Enterprise JavaBeans 3.1" from O'Reilly Media. Member of the JBoss Application Server development team and technical lead of the ShrinkWrap project. Proudly employed by JBoss / Red Hat.

Ivar Rummelhoff is a principal engineer at Computas AS. He has a PhD i Logic (Type Theory) and a lifelong interest in programming and programming languages. At work he is mainly using Java and C#, at home everything else.

André Heie Vik er utdannet Master i Informatikk fra NTNU. Til daglig jobber han som konsulent hos Miles i Bergen, der han også er engasjert i det lokale fagmiljøet, blant annet som medarrangør av Roots-konferansen. Faglige interesser inkluderer utviklingsmetodikk, kvalitet, og automatisering av infrastruktur.

Ken Sipe is the CTO of Gradleware, Inc. (gradleware.com). With the co-founders Hans Dockter and Adam Murdoch, Ken helps companies of all sizes adopt agile practices and automate their enterprise systems enabling faster time to market and higher quality. Ken has been a practitioner and instructor of RUP since the late 1990s, and an extreme programmer and coach since the middle 2000s. Ken has worked with Fortune 500 companies to small startups in the roles of developer, designer, application architect and enterprise architect. Ken's current focus is on enterprise system automation and continuous delivery systems. Ken is an international speaker on the subject of software engineering speaking at conferences such as JavaOne, JavaZone, Jax-India, and The Strange Loop. He is a regular speaker with NFJS where he is best known for his architecture and security hacking talks. In 2009, Ken was honored by being awarded the JavaOne Rockstar Award at JavaOne in SF, California and the JavaZone Rockstar Award at JavaZone in Oslo, Norway as the top ranked speaker.

Fredrik Vraalsen has over 10 years of experience as a software developer working with J2EE, Swing client applications and Java/C++ on mobile devices. Currently he is a Java developer/consultant at Know IT Objectnet, where he does design and development on a large sales back-end system and client application for NSB. He is also interested in alternative languages on the JVM, in particular Scala, and is co-founder of scalaBin.

Cathrine er senior utvikler i Knowit hvor hun har jobbet i fire år. Hun er systemutviker og scrummaster, og opptatt av metodikk og brukergrensesnitt. Jobber for tiden på et stort prosjekt med høy attention i privat sektor.

Eugene Ciurana (http://ciurana.eu) is the VP of Technology at Badoo.com, one of the largest social networking sites in worldwide, and a cofounder of SOBA Labs, the most sophisticated public and private clouds management software. Eugene is also an open source evangelist who specializes in the design and implementation of mission-critical, high availability systems. He recently built scalable computational networks for leading financial, software, insurance, SaaS, government, and health care companies in the US, Japan, Mexico, and Europe. Eugene can be found on the Freenode IRC network (##java, #awk, #python, #mongodb) under the /nick pr3d4t0r.

Vegard Hartmann er fagleder for kvalitet og testing i Bekk. Han har alltid vært opptatt av å levere best mulig kvalitet og har de senere årene jobbet som teknisk ansvarlig og løsningsarkitekt på et forvaltningsprosjekt som omfatter over 40 gamle og nye løsninger i en stor organisasjon.

Tim is a full-stack generalist and passionate teacher who loves coding, presenting, and working with people. He is founder and principal software developer at the August Technology Group, a technology consulting firm focused on the JVM. He is a speaker internationally and on the No Fluff Just Stuff tour in the United States, and is co-president of the Denver Open Source User Group. He has recently been exploring non-relational data stores, continuous deployment, and how software architecture should resemble an ant colony. He lives in Littleton with the wife of his youth and their three children.

Norwegian emigrant living and working in Germany. I feast on everything software development, agile, XP, open source, Java, the Web, etc. Homepage: http://www.tfnico.com - twitter: @tfnico

Mario works as a consultant and architect at Ciber Norway. Mario's main focus areas are enterprice architecture, SOA-governance, IAM and agile proceses. Mario has a very strong interest in technology trends and often engages himself in discussions about innovation that can change the IT-industry. Mario has held presentations at JavaZone for several years, and has discusses many diferent topics such as: BPM and SOA, jBPM , Scrum and OpenSSO

Claus Ibsen is a software engineer and integration specialists from FuseSource (http://fusesource.com/). Claus is technical lead on the open source integration framework Apache Camel (http://camel.apache.org) and co-author of the "Camel in Action" book (http://www.manning.com/ibsen). Claus is the most active contributor to Apache Camel and is very active in the Camel community. He hang out on the Camel mailing lists, irc-room and often blogs about Camel. At FuseSource he leads the development of Camel and provides consulting and support to customers. Claus is frequent speaker at FuseSource community day events on subjects related to Camel. Claus spoke at CamelOne 2011, JEEConf 2011, SDC 2011, DevNexus 2011, TSSJS 2011, and Devoxx 2010 as well. Prior to joining FuseSource, Claus has worked with integration in all sorts for the last decade.

Eirik jobber som Chief Scientist hos Kantega, et ansatteid it-konsulentselskap. Der prøver han å finne lurere måter å utvikle programvare, dele kunnskap og løse problemer på. Eirik liker også å bidra i open source prosjekter og holder ofte foredrag på konferanser.

Independent Consultant, Author, Teacher since 1960 Author of Competitive Engineering (2005) www.gilb.com
Independent Consultant, Author, Teacher www.gilb.com

Erik jobber som seniorkonsulent i Webstep, er styremedlem i IASA Norge og aktiv bidragsyter til Cantara Community Wiki. Han har spesialistkompetanse på utviklertesting og byggemiljø i store prosjekter og har vært sentral i utviklingen av konseptene Enterprise Maven Infrastructure og JigZaw (en testmodell for smidig utvikling).

Janniche Haugen er utvikler og Fagleder for Java i BEKK. Hun har jobbet i store utviklingsprosjekter i over 7 år, og har alltid hatt fokus på testbarhet og kvalitet. De siste 3 årene har hun snakket på JavaZone med dette som en rød tråd. Favoritt sitat: "Expert programmers are those who write code even idiot programmers can understand. Idiot programmers are those who write code not even expert programmers can understand."
Trond Arve Wasskog er utvikler og CTO i BEKK. Han har jobbet med Java og Java EE applikasjonsutvikling i mer enn ti år, med fokus på smidig utvikling, kvalitet og vedlikeholdbarhet.

Øyvind er utdannet sivilingeniør fra NTNU og jobber hos Systek.

Costin is Senior Technical Staff at SpringSource, VMware. His interests include data access and aspect oriented programming. With significant development experience, Costin is involved in the development of Spring framework and Spring Data. Leads Spring Dynamic Modules (Spring OSGi) project and the Spring-inspired, OSGi 4.2 Blueprint Service RI. Speaker at various editions of EclipseCon/OSGi DevCon, JavaOne, Javapolis, JavaZone, SpringOne, SpringOne2GX, TSSJS, TSE on Java/Spring/OSGi related topics.

Nathaniel T. Schutta is a senior software engineer focussed on making usable applications. A proponent of polyglot programming, Nate has written two books on Ajax and speaks regularly at various No Fluff Just Stuff symposia, universities, and Java user groups. In addition to his day job, Nate is an adjunct professor at the University of Minnesota where he teaches students to embrace dynamic languages.

Ola Ellnestam likes to combine technology, people and business, which is why he finds software development so interesting. After coming in contact with eXtreme Programming he realized that developing software doesn't necessarily mean big and seemingly endless projects. There are flexible and fun ways to develop software too. More than anything else, he likes to share his knowledge with others because he believes that this is how new knowledge and insights are created.
Daniel Brolund has a small working memory. He tries to compensate for his bad memory by using and spreading solid working habits, like limited work-in-progress, TDD, and automation. He is a co-creator of the Mikado Method, a process and memento for large transformations of legacy systems. The method has enabled him to actually perform such transformations, in spite of his memory shortage! If you meet him, please refresh his memory and tell him your name. Twitter: @danielbrolund

Jan Henrik Gundelsby er utdannet Cand Scient og har over 10 års erfaring med serverside Java-teknologi, både J2EE og lettvektsrammeverk. Han jobber i dag for Know IT Objectnet som teknisk prosjektleder, arkitekt og utvikler for et større offentlig IT-prosjekt. Jan Henrik er en ivrig lettvekts-fantast som forsøker å jobbe mot smidige arkitekturer og løsninger som gir økt produktivitet for utvikleren.

Aslak er en allsidig utvikler med erfaring fra C#, Ruby, Java og Scala. Han har over de siste 1,5 årene jobbet med utvikling og utrulling av applikasjoner til sky og jordnære hosting leverandører på alle 3 platformene. Aslak er ansatt i et nyoppstartet konsulentfirma i Sogndal, nLink AS. Firmaet springer ut fra miljøet rundt YAST.

Ken Sipe is a Technology Director with Perficient, Inc. (PRFT), an application architect, frequent technical speaker, author of several articles and courses, and software and methodology mentor. He is founder of CodeMentor, Inc., focusing on training and mentor in distributed computing technologies. Ken has delivered hundreds of private and public presentations including JavaOne, BorCon and NFJS.

A community guy, devoted to sharing knowledge and building great communities and value in software systems. Opinionated Sun Java Champion, leader of IASA Norway, founder of Cantara AS and former president of the very successful Norwegian JUG javaBin and the great JavaZone Conference. Member of the Advisory Board of java.net. Speaker on several conferences including JavaZone, JavaONE, CommunityONE, XP-conference, Microsoft Application Platform, Smidig, OMG Information Days, the Software conference and various others. With over 30 years of professional programming experience spanning quite a few programming languages he has contributed in both international and domestic projects in various roles, including CTO, project leader, technology mentor, software architect, lead developer, technology strategist and trainer.

Morten er utdannet sivilingeniør i datateknikk fra NTNU og jobber som systemutvikler i Iterate AS.

Håvard er arkitekt og utvikler i Kantega AS, der han de siste 5 årene har jobbet med virksomhetskritiske systemer for en større norsk virksomhet. Håvard etterstreber balanse, enten det er i bølger og bris, fjellsider med nysnø eller API-design.

Dick Wall is a veteran Java developer who has recently switched to developing in Scala full time. His day job is with Locus Development, working on human genetic research and discovery. Dick also has a partnership with Bill Venners providing Scala training and consulting services, and is co-host on the popular Java Posse podcast.

Terje jobber som konsulent hos Accenture, og har gjennom 10 år fått være med på mange forskjellige prosjekter. De siste to årene har han jobbet som utvikler/arkitekt i Perform-prosjektet hos Statens pensjonskasse. Han er spesielt interessert i god kode, applikasjonsarkitektur og smidige metoder.

Alf Kristian jobber som seniorkonsulent i Know IT Objectnet. Til daglig programmerer han Java, men har flere bi-prosjekter i blant annet Clojure og Scala. Hans hovedinteresser er alternative programmeringsspråk og multi-core problemet.

Costin is Senior Technical Staff at SpringSource, VMware. His interests include data access and aspect oriented programming. With significant development experience, Costin is involved in the development of Spring framework and Spring Data. Leads Spring Dynamic Modules (Spring OSGi) project and the Spring-inspired, OSGi 4.2 Blueprint Service RI. Speaker at various editions of EclipseCon/OSGi DevCon, JavaOne, Javapolis, JavaZone, SpringOne, SpringOne2GX, TSSJS, TSE on Java/Spring/OSGi related topics.

Thomas er 27 år, bosatt i Oslo, konsulent i Mesan AS, og jobber til daglig med systemutvikling for desktop og mobile plattformer. Han er glødende interessert i mobilutvikling, da spesielt Android-plattformen, og er ivrig opptatt med å teste ut nye konsepter og løsninger på mobile enheter. Thomas var blant annet en del av teamet som utviklet Postens sporingsapplikasjon for Android og iPhone, og hadde det tekniske ansvaret for Android-delen av prosjektet.

Chris Richardson is a developer and architect with over 20 years of experience. He is a Java Champion and the author of POJOs in Action, which describes how to build enterprise Java applications with POJOs and frameworks such as Spring and Hibernate. Chris is the founder of CloudFoundry.com and works on cloud technology. He has a computer science degree from the University of Cambridge in England and lives in Oakland, CA with his wife and three children.

Simon Ritter is a Java Technology Evangelist at Oracle Corporation. Simon has been in the IT business since 1984 and holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Physics from Brunel University in the U.K. Originally working in the area of UNIX development for AT&T UNIX System Labs and then Novell, Simon moved to Sun in 1996. At this time he started working with Java technology and has spent time working both in Java technology development and consultancy. Having moved to Oracle as part of the Sun acquisition he now specialises in looking at emerging technologies including cloud computing, wireless sensor networks, and gestural interfaces.

Originally a student in informatics, mathematics, and digital signal processing, Christian Johansen has spent his professional career specializing in web and front-end development with technologies such as JavaScript, CSS, and HTML using agile practices. A frequent open source contributor, he blogs about JavaScript, Ruby, and web development at cjohansen.no. Christian is the author of "Test-Driven JavaScript Development" (Addison-Wesley 2010).

Nina er utdannet sivilingeniør i kommunikasjonsteknologi fra NTNU. Hun har tidligere jobbet som Java-konsulent, men jobber nå som systemutvikler i Basefarm. Hennes interesser er bl.a. programmeringsspråk, kodekvalitet og smidige metoder. Nina er aktiv i fagmiljøet i Oslo, hvor hun bl.a. er med på å arrangere fagmøter for javaBin.

Ken Stephansen is a Senior Consulant at Capgemini. He has over 10 years experince with devlopment and architecture whitin Java/J2EE. Over the years been part of starting up small and large development projects and had a lot of intresting experinces doing that.

Jonas Bonér is a husband, dad, programmer, teacher, speaker, musician, writer and Java Champion. He is the CTO of Typesafe and is an active contributor to the Open Source community; most notably created the Akka Project, AspectWerkz Aspect-Oriented Programming (AOP) framework, committer to the Terracotta JVM clustering technology and been part of the Eclipse AspectJ team. http://jonasboner.com

Johannes Brodwall is a solution architect by day and a test-infected Java programmer by night. He discovered extreme programming more than ten years ago and has been trying to practice test-driven development, continuous integration and pair programming ever since. He works for Steria Norway as chief scientist and travels the world spreading the joy of code.

Senior Software Engineer for JBoss by Red Hat, Inc. Project lead for the Arquillian project and contributor to ShrinkWrap, ShrinkWrap Descriptors, Weld, Seam 3 and JBoss AS 7.
Bartosz Majsak works as a software developer and consultant at Cambridge Technology Partners based in Zurich. He is a JBoss Arquillian team member and lead of two modules - Persistence Extension which makes writing database oriented tests even easier and Spock Test Runner which gives your Arquillian tests some BDD and Groovy love. One thing which might prove that he is not a total geek is his addiction to alpine skiing. He used to play Go game.

Morten har etter 20 år som utvikler og arkitekt, fått bred erfaring med hvordan man lager løsninger på mange ulike plattformer med arkitekturegenskaper som høy tilgjengelighet, ytelse, skalering, integrasjon, feiltoleranse og hvordan man ivaretar arkitekturegenskaper i forhold til drift og vedlikehold. Som konsulent i Miles AS har han de siste årene hatt et oppdrag hos et europeisk telekomselskap. I rollen som integrasjon- og løsningsarkitekt har han vært med å på etablere og videreutvikle en felles tjenesteplatform basert på Java og grid plattformen GigaSpaces XAP.

Magnus er Kodemaker og har lang og variert erfaring på Javaplattform. Han har de siste årene opparbeidet mye erfaring med byggeverktøy. Etter at han oppdaget Gradle for 2 år siden har han ikke sett seg tilbake. Magnus er svært opptatt av Groovy økosystemet og har vært med på å starte opp Oslo Groovy Meetup, hvor han også er Organizer.

Costin Leau is Staff Engineer at SpringSource, VMware. His interests include data access and aspect oriented programming. With significant development experience, Costin is involved in the development of Spring framework (authored the Spring 3.1 caching abstraction) and Spring Data. Led Spring Dynamic Modules (Spring OSGi) project and the Spring-inspired, OSGi 4.2 Blueprint Service RI. Currently working with NoSQL and Big Data technologies, leading Spring Redis and Spring Hadoop projects. Speaker at various editions of EclipseCon/OSGi DevCon, JavaOne, Devoxx/Javapolis, JavaZone, SpringOne, SpringOne2GX, TSSJS, TSE on Java/Spring/OSGi/Hadoop related topics.

Dalibor Topi? lives in Hamburg, Germany, and works as Java F/OSS Ambassador for Oracle. He joined the OpenJDK project in order to help make it a successful open source project, and stayed for anchoring Java in Linux distributions, and as an all around Java F/OSS community guy. He joined the Java strategy team at Oracle to help provide community feedback into the long-term strategy planning.

Utdannet sivilingeniør i kommunikasjonsteknologi fra NTNU. Jobber som systemutvikler i Iterate AS. Har holdt flere kurs og workshops om Git.

Ole er utvikler og Seniorkonsulent hos Steria. Han laget sin første hjemmeside i 1996 og har etter dette vært spesielt interessert i webutvikling. Sist gang han fikk utfolde seg på dette var hos en stor norsk bank.

Olivier Gaudin is co-founder and CEO at SonarSource, the company that develops and promotes the open source platform Sonar to manage source code quality. Olivier started his carea in London, working on trading systems in the banking industry. He then managed IT for a startup, ran big projects such as off-shoring, CMMi and ran support and development departments. Olivier has developed a strong sensibility to robustness of processes and quality of delivery. In 2007, Olivier starts contributing to Sonar and decides with Simon Brandhof and Freddy Mallet to setup SonarSource, the company that develops and promotes Sonar while growing some business around the platform.

Olve Maudal works for Cisco Systems where he is involved in developing telepresence and video conferencing products and solutions. He loves to write code, but is just as interested in how software is developed as what it actually does. Olve is also an active member of the vibrant geek community in Oslo where he is involved in JavaPils, Cantara, XP Meetup, Oslo C++ Users Group, Lean Meetup and a few other things.
Lars Gullik works for Cisco Systems Norway.

Dr. Don Syme is a Principal Researcher at Microsoft Research, Cambridge. He has a long and deep history of programming language research and design. He is the the main designer and architect of F#, one of the most original and innovative programming languages today, with a strong influence on the design of Scala and C#, including Scala extractors, C# generics and C# asynchronous programming.

Matt joined IBM in 2000 as a member of the IBM JVM development team. He has deep knowledge of the IBM JVM especially in technology areas such as garbage collection , Shared Classes, serviceability and diagnostics. In 2005 he moved to the IBM Java support organisation and is one of the technical leads within the global team working with customers and providing consultancy to many different product development teams across a wide range of JDK related issues. Away from IBM he plays football, has a keen interest in fitness & nutrition and is an avid gamer.

Frode er manager i Bekk Consulting og har lang erfaring med integrasjon av it-systemer både ved hjelp av SOAP og REST. Han jobber for tiden med Postens nye storsatsning, Digipost. Her har han hatt ansvar for å designe og implementere ulike API'er for både eksterne kunder og internt bruk. Gjennom gradvis forbedring har han vært med på å gjøre disse API'ene mer roboste for endring ved å innføre en hypermediadrevet arkitektur.
Espen er konsulent i Bekk Consulting, og arbeider for tiden med Postens nye storsatsning, Digipost. Her har han hatt ansvar for å designe og implementere ulike API'er for både eksterne kunder og internt bruk. Gjennom gradvis forbedring har han vært med på å gjøre disse API'ene mer roboste for endring ved å innføre en hypermediadrevet arkitektur. Tidligere har han holdt foredrag på blant annet JavaZone, Roots og Free Test.

Been a Java consultant for over 10 years, now at Knowit, currently working for Comoyo.

Kai Bjørnstad jobber for tiden som Manager og Fagleder for Java gruppen i Bekk Consulting AS. Han har jobbet flere år både i konsulentbransjen og med utvikling av komplisert hyllevare programvare for bedriftsmarkedet. Kai har lang erfaring i bruk av Open Source, eksempelvis PostgreSQL, JBoss, Spring, Eclipse og Linux og har bred kompetanse innen flere teknologier bla. C/C++, Python, Java, Scala, JEE/J2EE, XML og SQL. Han har stor faglig interesse for Enterprise arkitektur, design patterns og JEE plattformen og er også velkjent med integrasjon og bruk av Open Source i kommersiell sammenheng.

Morten er utdannet sivilingeniør i datateknikk fra NTNU og jobber som systemutvikler i Iterate AS. Han har jobbet med Javautvikling i 7 år, og er interessert i kodekvalitet og testing. I tillegg til det opptrer han også som kursholder i versjonskontrollsystemet Git.

Brian McCallister works as a Distinguished Engineer at Ning, the world’s largest platform for creating social websites. In that capacity he has lead the design and implementation of one of the original Platform as a Service offerings on the Internet, and its technical and product evolution since the beginnings of the company. Brian has also served as a Member, Vice President and Director of the Apache Software Foundation where he has worked on the flagship HTTPD Web Server and many Java based projects. Brian specializes in consumer Internet systems, the intersection of group social dynamics and technology, and community driven open source.

Vidar jobber som utvikler og fagleder for webutvikling i Knowit i Oslo. Vidar har jobbet som utvikler siden 2007, men har programmert så lenge han kan huske - alle fall siden ungdomsskolen. Vidar jobber til daglig med store kodebaser, og er opptatt av god kode og er møkka lei dårlige rammeverk/biblioteker.

Odin is a IT consultant with a background in enterprise Java solutions. He has experience with using Groovy for testing Java projects and loves making things better.

Lars Andreas jobber som seniorkonsulent i Mesan AS hvor han også har en sentral rolle i fagorganisasjonen. Han har 6 års erfaring fra store og små prosjekter på javaplattformen, med roller som utvikler, teamleder og arkitekt. Lars Andreas er blant annet interessert i kodekvalitet og vedlikeholdbare løsninger på komplekse problemer.

Opinionated programmer with a beard at Arktekk Kaare Nilsen is a passionate programmer with more than 15 years of experience from projects in various industries, in both private and government sector. After all these years he is proud to still call himself a programmer. Kaare is not afraid of letting his voice be heard, and often speaks about various programming and open source topics at meetups and conferences.

Tommy Skodje is a systems consultant for Antares Gruppen AS. He has developed software professionally since 1995. The last 12 years mostly in Java, for the web. Published his first open source project in 2011, and felt so good about it that he wants to help others along.

Bjorn Boe works as a Solution Architect at Oralce, specializing in Oracle middleware solutions, including Oracle Coherence. At Oracle he has spent a lot of time with large American customers solving problems around performance and scalability using data grid solutions. Prior to joining Oracle he worked as a consultant where he got a lot of experience dealing with issues around performance and scalability.

Anders er seniorkonsulent hos Miles AS. Han har over 7 års erfaring fra store og små prosjekter innenfor mange forskjellige bransjer. Gjennom varierende roller i prosjekter har han fått solid erfaring med smidige prosesser, Java EE, TDD, databaser, integrasjon og objektorientert design. Han brenner for smidige prosesser og enkel, endringsdyktig kode som gir maksimalt med verdi for organisasjonen.

John Davies is co-founder and CTO of Incept5 and was the technical architect behind what is now Visa's V.me. He was previously chief architect at JPMorgan and BNP Paribas, co-founder of C24 (sold to Iona then later sold to Progress) and technical director at both Iona and Progress Software. John has co-authored of several enterprise Java and architecture books and is a frequent speaker at banking and technology conferences.

Andrey is the lead language designer working on Project Kotlin at JetBrains (http://kotlin.jetbrains.org/). He also works on making the Java language better, serving as a Java Community Process expert in a group for JSR-335 ("Project Lambda"). In what spare time is left he tries to make sure that his traveling is not all about work and teaches programming to high-school children. Used to teach OOP/Software Design at a university, but currently switched to speaking at software conferences. Audiences of Devoxx, OSCON, StrangeLoop, Jfokus and other events gave warm reception to his talks on Kotlin, programming languages and foundations of software engineering.

Johannes Brodwall is a solution architect by day and a test-infected Java programmer by night. He discovered extreme programming more than ten years ago and has been trying to practice test-driven development, continuous integration and pair programming ever since. He works for Steria Norway as chief scientist and travels the world spreading the joy of code.

Kevlin is an independent consultant and trainer based in the UK. His development interests are in patterns, programming, practice and process. He has been a columnist for various magazines and web sites, including Better Software, The Register, Application Development Advisor, Java Report and the C/C++ Users Journal. Kevlin is co-author of A Pattern Language for Distributed Computing and On Patterns and Pattern Languages, two volumes in the Pattern-Oriented Software Architecture series. He is also editor of the 97 Things Every Programmer Should Know site and book.

Kari is a dedicated and versatile software architect, developer and course instructor. She has several years’ experience with software development and design. She is employed by Itera Consulting, and spends her days working as an architect at a large Norwegian financial institution. She frequently cooks up homemade software tidbits in her kitchen.

Java Programmer employed at Webstep. 17 years of professional experience with many programming languages and platforms. Information flow enabler.

Jan Henrik Gundelsby er utdannet Cand Scient og har over 10 års erfaring med serverside Java-teknologi, både J2EE og lettvektsrammeverk. Han jobber i dag for Know IT Objectnet som teknisk prosjektleder, arkitekt og utvikler for et større offentlig IT-prosjekt. Jan Henrik er fagleder for DevOps i Knowit og en ivrig lettvekts-fantast som forsøker å jobbe mot smidige arkitekturer og løsninger som gir økt produktivitet for utvikleren.

Svein Otto er senior systemutvikler hos Kantega AS. Han har hatt systemutvikling som levebrød de siste 30 år, fortsatt i live, nysgjerrig og glødende interessert i programmering. "Kompilatoren er vår venn !" er et slagord han sverger til. Har programmert i Java, C++, Mary, Simula...

Peter Norrhall is Chief Architect at Extenda where he continuously tries to improve the software products, processes and people. Peter has been working for 20 years with software and system development and architecture with a broad range of technologies on his conscience. From time to he speaks at community forums and developer conferences. Extenda is the market leader in the Nordic countries, with a state-of-the-art retail solution with installations in 27 countries in Europe, US and Canada, in 7.000 stores and 32.000 POS terminals

Agile pragmatic programmer in Java, Javascript, C# & Web-technologies, git-nerd. Apache Maven committer/PMC, Selenium committer. Test-nerd with over 10 years experience of testing some of the worst systems around.

Reidar Sollid is a software developer/consultant with background in the Telecom from companies like Ericsson, Nera Networks and as a consultant at Cisco Telepresence systems. Reidar is one of the founders of Baksia and has held several talks for javaBin and Baksia.

Lars Marius is a consultant at Bouvet. He has worked with information management, and particularly semantic technologies, for the past decade, mostly as CTO at Ontopia, a semantic software company. He was editor of the Topic Maps ISO standards, wrote an open source XML parser in Python and a book on XML development for Prentice-Hall. He was also responsible for the Unicode support in the Opera web browser.

Karianne holds an MSc in ICT from the University of Bergen, Norway. She lives and works in Bergen as a developer for the consulting company Miles. Her main fields of interest includes patterns, agile development and sustainable development. Karianne loves contributing to the development community, and organises the Roots conference in Bergen. She has also contributed to the Smidig conference in Oslo and Oslo XP meetup. Karianne enjoys speaking at conferences, and has presented at conferences like Smidig, Javazone, XP, NDC and JFokus.

Bodil has been a web developer since before the web was cool, and has shepherded many big projects built on web technologies, among them two generations of web map applications for Eniro, Scandinavia's leading business search provider. She currently works as a freelance consultant, helping clients drag their projects kicking and screaming out of the enterprise world into the shiny new future of technologies like Clojure, Git and Node.JS. She lives in Oslo, Norway with her pet Roomba and two chili plants.

Jostein har jobbet med Java-utvikling i 8 år og har en genuin interesse for sikkerhet. Han har et stort ønske om at Java-verden skal bli mer sikkerhetsbevisst, og mener det er på høy tid at JavaZone nå har fått et topic som heter "Security". Til daglig jobber Jostein som Senior Software Engineer hos Steria.

Tim is a full-stack generalist and passionate teacher who loves working with people as much as he loves to code. He is a GitHubber whose mission is to make it easy for everybody in the world to use Git. He is a speaker internationally and on the No Fluff Just Stuff tour in the United States, who loves to speak on Git, Cassandra, and other topics. He is co-president of the Denver Open Source User Group, co-presenter of the best-selling O'Reilly Git Master Class, co-author of Building and Testing with Gradle, a member of the O'Reilly Expert Network, and a member of the GigOM Pro Analyst Network. He occasionally blogs at http://timberglund.com. He lives in Littleton, CO, USA with the wife of his youth and their three children.

experience with development and architecture within Java/J2EE. Over the years been part of starting up small and large development projects. In that period he has had an opportunity to work with creating low level Java code to front end development. The last year he has been having the role as a ScrumMaster and beeing a Java resource for a Scrum team. All of different roles in his career have given him a large overview and experience how what Java is all about.

Stefan Magnus Landrø er manager i Bekk Consulting, og jobber til daglig med utviklingen av Digipost for Posten Norge. Han har vært ansvarlig for sikkerhets- og ytelsestesting i prosjektet. Stefan er en aktiv bidragsyter i BEKKs javamiljø, og har tidligere holdt foredrag på blant annet JavaZone, Software og Smidig-konferansene.

Kai Bjørnstad jobber for tiden som Manager og Fagleder for Java gruppen i Bekk Consulting AS. Han har jobbet flere år både i konsulentbransjen og med utvikling av komplisert hyllevare programvare for bedriftsmarkedet. En fellesnevner for de fleste prosjektene han har deltatt i er SQL databaser. En annen fellesnevner har vært en stadig endring av disse databasene for å tilpasse seg ny eller endret funksjonalitet i applikasjonene som benytter dem. Kai har lang erfaring i bruk av Open Source, eksempelvis PostgreSQL, JBoss, Spring, Eclipse og Linux og har bred kompetanse innen flere teknologier bla. C/C++, Python, Java, Scala, JEE/J2EE, XML og SQL. Han er også velkjent med integrasjon og bruk av Open Source i kommersiell sammenheng.

Angelika Langer works as an independent trainer with a course curriculum of challenging Java seminars. She writes the "Effective Java" column for the German JavaMagazin and is author of the Java Generics FAQ, which is the most comprehensive resource on Java generics. She enjoys speaking at conferences all over the world, including JavaOne, OOPLSA, JAX, JFokus, SDC, to name a few. Her teaching focuses on advanced Java programming, performance issues, and concurrent programming. Further information can be found at www.AngelikaLanger.com.

Engasjert utvikler og arkitekt med 10 års erfaring fra ulike prosjekter. Brenner for god kode, et godt produkt og smidig utvikling.

Anders Brujordet er utdannet Master i Informatikk ved NTNU og jobber som utvikler hos Knowit i Oslo. Anders er svært glad i alt av teknologi som kan gjøre hverdagen lettere og skape mer tid nye teknologier.

Torstein er sjefsarkitekt og medeier i Kantega AS. Torstein har 10 års erfaring med arkitektur og systemutvikling på Java-plattformen. Han er arkitekt i et prosjekt med en størrelse på 20 000 timer, basert på Apache Wicket.

Harald har jobbet profesjonellt med Java siden 1998, og har lang erfaring fra utvkiling av Java EE-, Swing-løsninger og spesielt CMS-systemer. I de siste årene har han jobbet som konsulent i Bouvet. Harald er glad i enkle løsninger som fungerer, og går fort lei av dårlige brukeropplevelser (selv om han nok har bidratt til en og annen dårlig løsning i løpet av karrieren sin selv, om han skal være helt ærlig). Harald interesserer seg for fotografering, digital bildebehandling og har en forkjærlighet for sære filformater. Selv om det blir stadig vanskeligere å finne tid til gladprogrammering på fritiden, får han en gang i blant brukt dette til noe matnyttig, og da fryder nerden i ham seg. :-)

Jan Fredrik Wedén jobber i BEKK og har over ti års erfaring som systemutvikler, konsulent og arkitekt. Han har jobbet med systemer i alle størrelsesordner, fra små enbrukersystemer, via små og mellomstore publiseringssystemer og webløsninger til moderne webapplikasjoner og komplekse integrasjonsprosjekter. Han kom tidlig inn i prosjekter som benyttet testdrevet utvikling og smidige teknikker og har senere jobbet i mange team som har praktisert varianter av Scrum, lean, XP og kombinasjoner av disse. Etter en kort periode med gammeldags ASP-utvikling i begynnelsen av sin karriere har Jan Fredrik siden bygget sin kjernekompetanse på Javaplattformen innen enterprise- og webprosjekter. Han var innom EJB den gangen det var skikkelig hot og byttet til lettvektsløsninger og IoC-rammeverk ettersom det overtok tronen som det kuleste man kunne drive med. Persistering har vært løst via alt fra selvskrevne JDBC-lag via ORM-rammeverk og i den senere tid lagring uten SQL. Han har jobbet med integrasjonsløsninger og varianter med REST, SOAP og WS-* i bransjer som energihandel, bank/finans og innen utdanningssektoren. På fritiden har han stor interesse for bratt friluftsliv og er gjerne å finne på et fjell med ski under bena, klatrende i en fjellvegg eller syklende der motoriserte kjøretøy sjelden kommer frem.

Also known as √, is a passionate programmer with a taste for concurrency paradigms and performance optimization. Tech Lead for the Akka project at Typesafe.

As architect and designer of Java tools, demos, and several professional Swing libraries, Karsten Lentzsch is considered a leading expert in Java user interface technology and pluggable look&feel. He brings a wealth of experience in designing usable and elegant Java application to JGoodies. For over 21 years Karsten has been involved in object technologies and user interface design as a consultant, trainer, architect and expert developer. Since adopting Java programming early in 1997 he has designed and developed stand-alone applications, application frameworks, Java libraries, and enhancements to the Java look. He publishes articles about Java UI topics and talks at major Java conferences.

Anders bor i Stockholm og jobber som konsulent for Valtech. Han er en erfaren mobil og web utvikler og har mange års erfaring med device og browser fragmentering. Han har jobbet på mange store mobilprosjekter, men er nå mest involvert i Responsive Web prosjekter og optimering av den mobile opplevelsen.

Phil is a software architect at the Guardian who has spent long enough eating his own dog food to realise that it's not always someone else's incompetence that leads to an imperfect solution. Phil firmly believes that architects should regularly get their fingers dirty in code and hacks some Scala whenever he gets the chacne.

Thomas er en systemkonsulent i Mesan AS, og jobber til daglig som mobilutvikler på Mesta. Han har god erfaring med Android-applikasjoner, og har blant annet laget Postens sporingsapplikasjon på Android. Nå sitter han i et stort Enterprise-prosjekt på Android nettbrett som arkitekt og utvikler hos Mesta. Thomas elsker mobilteknologi, og søker stadig nye måter å benytte denne fantastiske nyvinningen.

Sveinung jobber som utvikler hos BEKK. For tiden fokuserer han på Kontinuerlige leveranser og DevOps, og hvordan man gjennom dette kan forbedre kvaliteten på produktet og redusere "waste". Han har tidligere presentert på Smidig og Akademy.

Therese Lindblom har det siste året arbeidet med å øke fokus på sikkerhets- og systemarkitektur i utviklingsmiljøet i Politiets data- og materielltjeneste (PDMT) samt å etablere rutiner for arkitekturstyring. Hun jobber med mål om at rutiner og metoder skal være enkle å følge og at brukerne av metodeverket ser nytten helt på egen hånd. Therese leder seksjonen for systemarkitektur i PDMT.

Anton is Software Engineer and JRebel Product Lead at ZeroTurnaround. Professional interests include programming laguages, middleware and tooling. Java enthusiast, vim fan, IntelliJ addict. He likes tee and doesn't drink coffee. Anton has delivered talks at international Java conferences: Jfokus, GeeCON, JavaZone, EclipseCon, JavaOne Moscow, 33rd Degree and various JUG meetups.

Konrad Beiske er sivilingenør innen datateknikk med spesialisering på databaser fra NTNU. For tiden jobber han i Bouvet og er engasjert i styret i javaBin. I sin master oppgave jobbet han med tilpasning av cache investement for en semantisk cache i et peer-to-peer-basert databasesystem.

Ivar jobber til daglig som webutvikler hos Itera Consulting. Han elsker å finne enkle og robuste løsninger på nye utfordringer. De siste årene har Ivar jobbet mye med WEB-løsninger, både tradisjonelle, og med RIA-løsninger hvor hele fronten implementeres i JavaScript. Ivar er opptatt av å bygge et sterkt lokalt fagmiljø og har de siste årene aktivt bidratt med å arrange den årlige Smidigkonferansen.

Tobias er fagsjef i Know IT Objectnet. Han har 15 års erfaring fra konsulentbransjen hvor han stort sett har jobbet med utvikling av store mellomvareløsninger implementert i Java. Tobias har tidligere holdt foredrag på rOOts, JavaZone, Kunnskapstinget og flere andre konferanser. Han er styremeldem i dataforeningen østlandet og en av initativtakerene til konferansen Communities in Action. Tobias er tidligere styremedlem i javaBin og satt i JavaZones programkomite fra 2004-2009. Tre av disse årene fungerte han som leder.

Johan has worked at Capgemini since 2009 and has more than 6 years experience from software development. He has had several roles and is currently working as a project manager for a salesforce project.

Software developer, DevOps, and performance testing enthusiasist
Senior software engineer at Comoyo. Previously research scientist at Telenor, senior systems architect at Telenor (Norge, Nordic, ...). Holds a Cand. Scient. degree from the University of Oslo.

Morten har etter 20 år som utvikler og arkitekt, fått bred erfaring med hvordan man lager løsninger på mange ulike plattformer med arkitekturegenskaper som høy tilgjengelighet, ytelse, skalering, integrasjon, feiltoleranse og hvordan man ivaretar arkitekturegenskaper i forhold til drift og vedlikehold. Som konsulent i Miles AS har han de siste årene hatt et oppdrag hos et europeisk telekomselskap. I rollen som integrasjon- og løsningsarkitekt har han vært med å på etablere og videreutvikle en felles tjenesteplatform basert på Java og grid plattformen GigaSpace XAP.

Henrik Edberg works as an IT consultant for Netlight Consulting in Oslo, and has previously worked with development of the Java Virtual Machine JRockit for five years, first for BEA and later for Oracle.

Christian Kreutzfeldt works as an ecommerce platform architect at the Otto Group in beautiful Hamburg / Germany. He participated in the definition of the presented architecture from the beginning and is interested large scale architectures especially when it comes to his beloved topic: ecommerce.

Erlend is a developer at Bekk Consulting AS, where he is also the head of the security competency group. He is also the chapter leader of the OWASP Norway chapter. He is passionate about secure coding and secure-by-default frameworks that help developers build secure applications.

Polyglot utvikler som til vanlig jobber med en storskala Java backend-løsning. Har de senere år fått drypp av mobilappliksjoner inn i CV'en.

Markus Krüger is a developer at Comoyo, where he is getting paid for having fun with curly bracket languages. He has held several presentations at JavaZone and other venues previously, on various subjects such as performance testing, scheduling, and scalability through streaming. He likes making large things go fast.

Jobber som utvikler hos Knowit. Etter en bekymringsfri tilværelse på et av Norges første Scalaprosjekter vier Alfred nå sin kjærlighet til rundt 80 løst koblede Java komponenter i Oslo Kommune. Når han får mulighet, både på jobb og fritid, kan han raskt finne på å utøve selvpining i form av å lære seg JavaScript enda bedre. Dette går selvsagt ut over hans kjære kolleger på fagturer.

Eirik Folstad Wahl er en senior systemutvikler i konsulentselskapet Itema as i Trondheim. Eirik har drevet profesjonelt med systemutvikling i Java (og .NET) siden 2000. Etter å (skamfull) rekke opp hånden på Uncle Bob sitt spørsmål på JavaZone for noen år siden "Who of you in the audience does NOT do Test Driven Development?", og fått kollektiv (berettiget) kjeft, så har Eirik de siste par-tre årene fått skikkelig dreis på TDD, selv på gamle prosjekter. Han har erfaring fra å hjelpe kollegaer som kan TDD men ikke får til å komme igang.

Ian Robinson is Director of Customer Success for Neo Technology, the company behind Neo4j, the world's leading open source graph database. He is a co-author of 'REST in Practice' (O'Reilly) and a contributor to 'REST: From Research to Practice' (Springer) and 'Service Design Patterns' (Addison-Wesley). He presents at conferences worldwide on topics that include REST, the Web as an application platform, and the graph capabilities of Neo4j, and blogs at http://iansrobinson.com.

Erlend Flaten er utdannet Sivilingeniør i datateknikk fra NTNU. Til daglig jobber han som konsulent hos Antares Gruppen AS. Han har jobbet som utvikler siden 2005. De siste fire årene har han jobbet med browser-baserte saksbehandlingsapplikasjoner. Dette arbeidet krever repetitiv regresjonstesting som tar mye tid. Dette har inspirert til å finne frem til verktøy og metoder for å gjøre regresjonstestene lettere. Han jobber sammen andre konsulenter fra Antares Gruppen AS for å få automatiske GUI-tester som en enkel og solid del av regresjonstestene.

Seniorkonsulent i BEKK som har jobbet med utvikling i 4,5 år og tilhører faggruppen Mobilt. Liker å prøve ut ulike cross-plattform rammeverk for mobil utvikling og har tidligere holdt presentasjon og workshop om PhoneGap både i interne og eksterne fora.

Kevlin is an independent consultant and trainer based in the UK. His development interests are in patterns, programming, practice and process. He has been a columnist for various magazines and web sites, including Better Software, The Register, Application Development Advisor, Java Report and the C/C++ Users Journal. Kevlin is co-author of A Pattern Language for Distributed Computing and On Patterns and Pattern Languages, two volumes in the Pattern-Oriented Software Architecture series. He is also editor of the 97 Things Every Programmer Should Know site and book.
Filip van Laenen is Chief Engineer at the Norwegian software company Computas. He has fifteen years of experience in the software industry, from being a developer to lead developer and architect. Software quality improvement is one of his areas of interest, and a reason why he started experimenting with mutation testing a couple of years ago.

Fagleder på den mobile plattformen hos Knowit Objectnet.

Erfaren utvikler med over 10 år innen java bak seg. Har i det senere utviklet mye i scala og er opptatt av funksjonelle språk og lettere arkitekturer.

Eivind jobber i BEKK og har mange års erfaring som utvikler og arkitekt på Java-prosjekter. Han har stor interesse for forskjellige programmeringsspråk og paradigmer. Det siste året har han jobbet med utvikling av grid-baserte løsninger hos Skatteetaten. Eivind er også fagsjef for Java i BEKK. Han har holdt presentasjoner på JavaZone mange tidligere år.

Torstein er sjefsarkitekt og medeier i Kantega AS. Torstein har 10 års erfaring med arkitektur og systemutvikling på Java-plattformen. Han er arkitekt i et prosjekt med en størrelse på 20 000 timer, basert på Apache Wicket.
Anders er systemutvikler og medeier i Kantega AS, sivilingeniør i Industriell Matematikk, med spesialisering innen abstrakt algebra. Han jobber i et prosjekt med en størrelse på 20 000 timer, basert på Apache Wicket.

Nathaniel T. Schutta is a senior software engineer focussed on making usable applications. A proponent of polyglot programming, Nate has written two books on Ajax and speaks regularly at various worldwide conferences, No Fluff Just Stuff symposia, universities, and Java user groups. In addition to his day job, Nate is an adjunct professor at the University of Minnesota where he teaches students to embrace dynamic languages.

Thierry is an engineer in computer science and management, graduate of Polytech'Montpellier. After eight years of experience in IT consulting, he starts contributing the open source Restlet Framework project in 2006. In 2008, he becomes co-founder of Restlet SAS (initially Noelios Technologies) in charge of the open source activity and of the infrastructure. Thierry is also a co-author of the Restlet in Action book published by Manning in 2012. Speaker experience: - MS TechDays 2010 (Rest overview) - GenevaJUG 2011 (Restlet overview)

Oddbjørn har vært aktiv i det norske Java-miljøet i en årrekke, som arrangør av javaBin-møter i Oslo, medlem av programkomiteen for JavaZone og styremedlem i javaBin.

Per Otto jobber som selvstendig konsulent i Objectdesign og har over 12 års erfaring som utvikler/arkitekt. Gjennom flere store prosjekter har han fått mange erfaringer rundt hva som fungerer og hva som ikke fungerer når det gjelder utvikling, spesielt når det dreier seg om arkitektur, kode eller utviklingsmiljø.

Hong Nhung jobber til daglig som manager i BEKK og har 6 års erfaring med Java-utvikling på store og små prosjekter. Hennes hovedinteresser er DDD, god kode, god testing og arkitektur.

Alf Kristian jobber i Know IT Objectnet. Til daglig programmerer han Scala, men har hatt Clojure som hobby i flere år. Hans hovedinteresser er alternative programmeringsspråk, multi-core problemet og lettvektsutvikling.

Marvin er systemutvikler hos Kantega AS. Han er sivilingeniør i datateknikk med fordypning i intelligente systemer. Hans karriere som utvikler startet i 2007 da han ble med i studentavisa Under Dusken som javautvikler. Hans karriere i Kantega startet i 2009 hvor han jobbet deltid frem til han i 2011 fullførte mastergraden sin og fikk fast ansettelse. Han har jobbet med forvaltning og utvikling av flere store java-applikasjoner, blant annet en Androidapplikasjon for Sparebank 1.

Experience from software development and management in Telenor and Storebrand. Professor at Simula Research Laboratory and University of Oslo. Advisor at Scienta. Promoting evidence-based software engineering. Research focus on management of complex projects and estimation of software development projects.

Erlend is a senior software consultant working in Arktekk. He mainly works as a software developer and architect. His technical interests revolve around HTTP, REST, and functional programming. He dabbles in multiple languages, some with more than one paradigm, including Scala. The target platform of choice is usually the JVM, but other platforms are also interesting. He has previously been the Chairman of javaBin (Norwegian Java User Group). He is involved with multiple open source projects, including being the lead developer and architect behind the open source HTTP–cache library HTTPCache4j.

Sindre er en student innenfor programmering som opplevde kjærlighet ved første blikk da han deltok i den aller første forelesningen om Ruby on Rails på høyskolen. Han har tidligere erfaring med velkjente Java og PHP, samt også HTML, CSS og JavaScript for web front-end. Han forelsket seg såpass i Ruby (og Rails) at han endte opp som veileder i det samme faget han selv deltok i, og mang en kveld og natt gikk med på å undersøke dette fantastiske språket og hva som kunne gjøres med det. Hans studentgruppe var den eneste som brukte Ruby on Rails i en skoleoppgave, og gruppen fikk toppkarakter for arbeidet. Han bruker mye av fritiden sin på web-utvikling og har flere prosjekter i luften som han ønsker å få ut i verden, både på egenhånd og sammen med venner.

Bjørn Nordlund is a developer at Cisco and his main quest as a programmer and system developer has always been to try to make things simpler and more manageable. To achieve this it is important to understand, identify and solve the real problems, which is often concealed behind technical impediments. He has held several talks at earlier javaZone and Smidig conferences.
is a programmer that repeatedly seems to discover that much to his disappointment just sitting down and coding is often not the most important thing that can be done on a software project. He is a recovering C++ programmer that mostly programms ruby these days, even though python is probably the programming language he knows best. Syver is employed at Cisco Systems as a software developer

Katrina is the system architect of Telenor Norway’s self service web solutions for the business segment. She has during the last year been involved in scalability and performance improvements related to customers being exposed to large data sets.
Currently working at Telenor Norway as a system area architect, Sebastian is responsible for business services in the mobile value chain. The last year he has been working on a project looking into how such services better can support search and retrieval of large dynamic data sets by the clients.

Jamie Allen is a consultant for Typesafe with over 18 years of experience delivering enterprise solutions across myriad industries, platforms, environments and languages. He has been developing enterprise applications with Scala since 2009, primarily using Actors for fault tolerance and managing concurrency at scale.

Just another programmer (with a decade of practical experience) who likes to speak her mind. Had the most viewed and highest rated lightening talk of last year's JavaZone (http://vimeo.com/28885655)

Jevgeni Kabanov is the founder and CEO of ZeroTurnaround (www.zeroturnaround.com), a development tools company that focuses on productivity. He wrote the first version of the ZeroTurnaround flagship product, JRebel, a class-reloading JVM plugin.Jevgeni has been speaking at international conferences for over 5 years, including JavaOne, Devoxx/JavaPolis, JavaZone, JAOO, QCon, TSSJS, JFokus and others. Jevgeni also started the first Java conference in Estonia, Geekout. He has an active research interest in programming languages, types and virtual machines, publishing several papers on topics ranging from category theoretical notions to typesafe Java DSLs.Jevgeni is on the Expert Group for the JSR 342 (Java EE 7). He has started two open-source projects -- Aranea and Squill. You can follow Jevgeni on Twitter as @ekabanov. See http://lanyrd.com/people/ekabanov/ for conference history and schedule.

Margaretha Miles is employed by Steria AS. She has worked for over a decade as a Java-developer and many years with legacy systems. In recent years she has been working with maintenance and acceptance testing of existing web applications.

Christian Egeberg er seniorkonsulent hos Knowit, og har jobbet med relasjonsdatabaser, webutvikling og mobilteknolologi i en årrekke. Mest på Microsoft plattform og Oracle.

Trygve Reenskaug is professor II emeritus of informatics at the University of Oslo. His retirement project is a new programming paradigm that separates the code for system behavior from the code for system state. Trygve has been a programmer since 1957. He has extensive teaching and speaking experience including keynotes, talks and tutorials. An important part of his career has been software engineering R&D for industrial strength software products. His firsts include end user programming, structured design, and data base oriented architecture from 1960; object oriented applications from 1973; Model-View-Controller in 1979; OOram role modeling method and tool from 1983; and the premier book on role modeling in 1995.

Peter is a long time Java developer, Grails user, plugin author, and co-author of the book Grails in Action with Glen Smith. He has been using Java for over 10 years across a range of industries and technologies, covering both client-side and server-side development. Since early 2010 he has been a developer advocate for VMware and has worked with Cloud Foundry since before its public release.

Michaël is an engineer and a developer advocate at DataStax where he actively works to improve Cassandra. At ease with both Enterprise Java and lower level technologies, he specializes in distributed architectures and topics such as NoSQL, search engines, and data processing. He often speaks about NoSQL in french Java User Groups and loves to write about his favorite topics.

Claudio Russo is a Researcher in the Programming Principles and Tools Group at Microsoft Research in Cambridge, UK. He has a PhD and BSc from the University of Edinburgh and has worked on .NET generics, type systems for functional and object-oriented languages and various .NET concurrency abstractions.

Jobber i Mesan AS som seniorkonsulent. Har utviklet i diverse større og mindre språk, men er mest interessert i prosess og utvikling som fag. Er sertifisert SCRUM-master og har jobbet "Scrummish" de siste 4-5 årene i forskjellige organisasjoner og team.

After working for years on transactional systems, Ludovic wrote the Bitronix JTA Transaction Manager. He then joined Terracotta as a software engineer to work on Ehcache and the Quartz enterprise scheduler.
Alex Snaps is a senior software engineer at Terracota Inc, with significant experience in web application development and highly concurrent systems. Before working on the Terracotta platform and product line, he participated in medium to large projects as coach, development lead and architect. He speaks regularly about Java development at events such as JavaOne, JavaPolis, Devoxx, JavaZone, Jazoon or XP Days as well as JUGs around the globe. He is currently working on Ehcache, the Quartz enterprise scheduler and the Terracotta Toolkit; he led the development of the Ehcache 2.5 Automatic Resource Management (ARC) effort.

Peyman er ansatt som konsulent i Javaavdelingen i Steria hvor han jobber med Autosys prosjektet. Han har mastergrad utdanning i systemutvikling fra UiO. Hans hoveinteresser er systemutvikling, innovasjon og fotball. Peyman spiller for sterialaget i fotball og liker å la ballen gjøre jobben i stedenfor å slite seg ut.

James Ward is a Principal Developer Evangelist at Heroku where he teaches developers how to deploy Java, Play! and Scala apps to the cloud.

Paul King leads ASERT, an organization based in Brisbane, Australia which provides software development, training and mentoring services to customers wanting to embrace new technologies, harness best practices and innovate. He has been contributing to open source projects for 20 years and is an active committer on numerous projects including Groovy. Paul speaks at international conferences, publishes in software magazines and journals, and is a co-author of Manning's best-seller: Groovy in Action.

Ken has been a practitioner and instructor of RUP since the late 1990s, and an extreme programmer and coach since the middle 2000s. Ken has worked with Fortune 500 companies to small startups in the roles of developer, designer, application architect and enterprise architect. Ken's current focus is on enterprise system automation and continuous delivery systems. Ken is an international speaker on the subject of software engineering speaking at conferences such as JavaOne, JavaZone, Jax-India, and The Strange Loop. He is a regular speaker with NFJS where he is best known for his architecture and security hacking talks. In 2009, Ken was honored by being awarded the JavaOne Rockstar Award at JavaOne in SF, California and the JavaZone Rockstar Award at JavaZone in Oslo, Norway as the top ranked speaker.

Morten jobber som konsulent i Arktekk og har 8 års erfaring som Javautvikler. Han har tidligere holdt foredrag på JavaOne og JavaZone. Han er også fotballdommer og dømmer til daglig i 4. divisjon i Oslo Fotballkrets.

Joined IBM in 1958 and has consulted internationally since 1960’s. Developed a set of methods for software and systems engineering. His ideas have been adopted by SEI CMM Level 4, XP and Agile methods. 2012 awarded Honorary Fellow of the British Computer Society. Published 9 books , see www.gilb.com
Kai Gilb • worked with Tom since 1990 • broadens the scope (example, expanding from product focus to Stakeholders) & focusing on essential fundamentals • written the Evo Project Management book manuscript see www.gilb.com (for download of Evo, and more info)

Trond Arve Wasskog er utvikler og CTO i Bekk Consulting. Han har jobbet med Java og Java EE applikasjonsutvikling i mer enn ti år, med fokus på smidig utvikling, kvalitet og vedlikeholdbarhet.

Dan Diephouse is the product manager at MuleSoft for Mule iON, an integration Platform as a Service. There he's focused on helping customers solve their integration problems in the cloud by integrating their cloud and on-premise applications as well as API enabling their existing systems. He has a long past in integration including co-founding Apache CXF, an open source web services framework; launching Tcat, an enterprise Tomcat application server; and helping shape Mule, the most popular open source ESB.

Andreas er seniorkonsulent i BEKK og jobber med Java, Ruby, Javascript og Flex. Han trives best i kommandolinja.

Anders Norås is a seasoned software developer and speaker. The 'enterpriseyness' of EJB drove him to Microsoft .NET back in 2002. He quickly made a name for himself in the Microsoft community by using his Java experiences to get a head start on fellow developers. In 2006 he got reacquainted with his lost love — Java — and today he is a polyglot combining the best of all worlds to build better software. He has given talks at many conferences and user group meetings and is known for talks with few slides and lots of code.

Jobber til daglig som Senior web utvikler hos UDP AS. Har de senere år jobbet mye med web, både tradisjonelle websider og RIA løsninger basert på både jQuery og Dojo.
Ivar jobber til daglig som webutvikler hos Itera Consulting. Han elsker å finne enkle og robuste løsninger på nye utfordringer. De siste årene har Ivar jobbet mye med WEB-løsninger, både tradisjonelle, og med RIA-løsninger hvor hele fronten implementeres i JavaScript. Ivar er opptatt av å bygge et sterkt lokalt fagmiljø og har de siste årene aktivt bidratt med å arrange den årlige Smidigkonferansen.

Josh Long is the Spring developer advocate. Josh is the lead author on Apress’ Spring Recipes, 2nd Edition, and a SpringSource committer and contributor. Josh likes solutions that push the boundaries of the technologies that enable them. His interests include scalability, BPM, grid processing, mobile computing and so-called "smart" systems. He blogs at blog.springsource.org or joshlong.com.
Oleg is a Sr. Software Engineer with SpringSource/VMWare and a core developer of Spring Integration framework. He has 16+ years of experience in software engineering across multiple disciplines including software architecture and design, consulting, business analysis and application development. After starting his career in the world of COBOL & CICS, Oleg has been focusing on professional Java and Java EE development since 1999. Since 2004 he has been heavily involved in using several open source technologies and platforms with Spring Framework at the forefront, while working on a number of projects around the world and spanning industries such as Telecommunication, Banking, Law Enforcement, US DOD and others.

Tim is a full-stack generalist and passionate teacher who loves coding, presenting, and working with people. His firm, the August Technology Group, helps clients with product development, technology consulting, and training in the technologies of the broader Java ecosystem. He is a speaker internationally and on the No Fluff Just Stuff tour in the United States, and is co-president of the Denver Open Source User Group, co-presenter of the best-selling O'Reilly Git Master Class, co-author of Building and Testing with Gradle, a trainer with GitHub.com, and a member of the O'Reilly Expert Network. He lives in Littleton, CO, USA with the wife of his youth and their three children.

PhD computer architecture, Google, YouTube, now Comoyo. Likes large scale hard algorithmic problems, backend engineer. Partly implemented Cloudname.

Roy is the author of the book The Art of Unit Testing, and writes about subjects such as unit testing, TDD Team Leadership and agile development on his blog is at osherove.com/blog , on twitter vis @royosherove and on 5whys.com

Masoud is a principal software engineer at ORACLE working in GlassFish project in the Security and PaaS areas. He is author of GlassFish and Java EE security book published in 2010 and several articles in that area in Java.net, dZone and other magazines. He is author or multiple well received refcardz about Security, Java EE, GlassFish, XML and NoSQL. He has a master degree in Information Systems and been involved with software projects since 2001. Masoud blogs regularly at http://kalali.me and he can be followed in his twitter @MasoudKalali
Markus is a principal technology consultant working for msg systems ag in Germany. Markus is a software architect, developer and consultant. He also writes for IT magazines. Markus joined msg in 2002 and has been a member of the Center of Competence IT-Architecture for nine years. After that Markus moved on to the IT-Strategy and Architecture group. He works daily with customers and projects dealing with Enterprise level Java and infrastructures. This includes the Java platform and several Web-related technologies on a variety of platforms using products from different vendors. His main area of expertise are Java EE Servers. Markus is speaking at different conferences about his favorite topics. He is also part of the Java EE 7 expert group. Stay up to date with his activities visiting his blog (http://blog.eisele.net/). Follow him on twitter @myfear.

Vidar jobber som utvikler og fagleder for webutvikling i Knowit i Oslo. Vidar har jobbet som utvikler siden 2007, men har programmert så lenge han kan huske - alle fall siden ungdomsskolen. Vidar jobber til daglig med store kodebaser, og er opptatt av god kode og er møkka lei dårlige rammeverk/biblioteker.

Svein-Magnus Sørensen is a technology evangelist working with innovative uses of data and technology at the consulting company NSA. In addition he has founded and is organizing a data community called the Oslo Open Data Forum and is an experienced speaker on data and information-related topics from a range of previous tech-conferences. For more information see his website and blog at http://www.menneske.org/ or contact @SveinMagnus on Twitter.

Darren Hague is an engineering architect in SAP Global IT's Web & Knowledge Management group. He has spent the last 10 years working in the area of identity management and single-sign on, specialising in the use of Java in the SAP ecosystem. Although his title says Architect he writes code more often than he writes PowerPoint slides, and he has spent the last couple of years working in the team that built a core component of SAP's cloud offering, the SAP ID Service. A speaker at SAP TechEd and Community Day conferences, he is also a SAP Mentor alumnus, co-organiser of annual SAP Inside Track London events, and author of the SAP Press book "Universal Worklist with SAP NetWeaver Portal".

Brendan maintains and supports the Java driver, as well as providing support for alternative JVM languages. He is currently developing a Hadoop integration plugin for MongoDB. Brendan's open source work related to MongoDB includes contributions to MongoKit, a Python object mapper for MongoDB as well as the creation of beaker_mongodb, a MongoDB persistence layer for the popular Python-based Beaker caching system. Brendan also created Casbah, a Scala toolkit for MongoDB. He is currently spending his spare time working on Hammersmith, an alternative asynchronous & non-blocking Scala driver for MongoDB.

Jørn Ola er utvikler og prosjektleder i Bekk Consulting. Han har jobbet med software-utvikling med .NET og Java i mer enn 10 år, både som utvikler og prosjektleder, og han er spesielt interessert i utviklingsmetodikk.

Jan Høydahl is an Apache Lucene/Solr committer and PMC member, search entrepreneur & speaker based in Oslo, Norway. Starting with search @ FAST in 2000, and later Lucene/Solr, he has 12 years of professional experience with enterprise search. He runs Cominvent AS, a consulting company specialized in high-end consulting, training and support for the Solr/Lucene ecosystem. He is also the initiator of the Oslo Solr Community MeetUp group.

From deep into the Nice mountains, Stéphane works for Red Hat on the Ceylon project. Passionate hacker in Java, C, Perl or Scheme. A web standards and database enthusiast, he implemented among other things a WYSIWYG XML editor, a multi-threading library in C, a mobile-agent language in Scheme (compiler and virtual machines), and some Web 2.0 RESTful services and rich web interfaces with JavaScript and HTML 5. Eager to share, he is a frequent speaker at various conferences such as the Scheme Workshop 2004, Nice Technical University in 2008, Polytech'Nice en 2009, Mars JUG, Paris JUG and Riviera Java User Group he founded with Nicolas Leroux. A long-time open-source user and advocate, he is committer on RESTEasy, author of jax-doclets, stamps.js and various Play! Framework modules, and developper on various Ceylon projects for Red Hat.

Core committer on the Ruboto project, and committer on the JRuby project. Employed at Datek Wireless AS in Norway where I develop M2M and fleet control systems on the Java platform, most often using JRuby. Started programming in 1980, and hope to keep coding til the day I die.

Robert is chief software architect at Roxar Software Solutions, a company providing tools in the energy sector for dealing with the masses of information flowing from today’s digital oil fields. He deals daily with understanding, designing, advocating and implementing effective architectures for sophisticated scientific and engineering software. He believes in the necessity of a strong engineering culture, performing a good measure of coaching and training in his organisation. Professionally, Robert is happiest with a whiteboard marker in hand exploring the solution space to a difficult problem with colleagues, so long at there is a Python interpreter not too far away. Beyond work he entertains himself porting Parallel LINQ from .NET to Python.

Jon Are Rakvåg took his MSc at the Selmer Institute for Secure and Reliable Communication at the University of Bergen. After starting off as a information security consultant, he made the switch to full time developer (and security geek) at Capgemini Norge AS, and is currently working for SpareBank 1. He is a Certified Information System Security Professional (CISSP) and a member of the Norwegian Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP) chapter.

Gojko Adzic is a strategic software delivery consultant who works with ambitious teams to improve the quality of their software products and processes. He specialises in agile and lean quality improvement, in particular agile testing, specification by example and behaviour driven development. Gojko is the author of Specification by Example, Bridging the Communication Gap, Test Driven .NET Development with FitNesse and The Secret Ninja Cucumber Scrolls

I’m a Java[EE] developer since 2005, working currently with Iterate AS. I’m highly interested in code quality, developer productivity (and tools like Maven and AOP/AspectJ), testing, performance, and web frameworks. I’m also very fond of the lean thinking and agile principles, especially feedback-based development, focus on creating true value ASAP, and respect for people. I share my technical endeavours at http://theholyjava.wordpress.com/.

Tim is a full-stack generalist and passionate teacher who loves working with people as much as he loves to code. He is a GitHubber whose mission is to make it easy for everybody in the world to use Git. He is a speaker internationally and on the No Fluff Just Stuff tour in the United States, who loves to speak on Git, Cassandra, and other topics. He is co-president of the Denver Open Source User Group, co-presenter of the best-selling O'Reilly Git Master Class, co-author of Building and Testing with Gradle, a member of the O'Reilly Expert Network, and a member of the GigOM Pro Analyst Network. He occasionally blogs at http://timberglund.com. He lives in Littleton, CO, USA with the wife of his youth and their three children.

Joachim is a senior consultant an owner at Haagen Software AS holding a Master of Information Technology from Queensland University of Technology (Brisbane, Australia). His professional career started in 2006 after graduating and have since then worked on large and complex systems, primarily automatic store replenishment at Norway's largest retailer, on the Perform project at Statens Pensjonskasse, and with an analysis tool for performing oil spill risk assessment.

Thomas Flemming currently works as a senior consultant at Mesan AS, where he does Java development. In 1995 he quit his job at a shipbroker to start working at small company started by some friends of him. They weren't able to pay salary, and lacked experience, but the had a good name and was to be first company in Norway dedicated to web applications and cd-rom. While working for Mogul Media, he created something very similiar to a wiki and later used it as basis for a content management system. Since then Thomas has been doing web development for different companies and at the University of Oslo. He lives in Oslo with three kids and still enjoys coding.

Jobber hos Nets Norway AS og sitter ved nødutgang hver gang han flyr samt at han er tittelhaver igjennom tre år på deiligst.no (i en rettferdig verden).
Jobber hos Nets Norway AS og er anerkjent som kongen over nettspill.

Kristian er Senior systemutvikler og medeier i Kantega AS med mastergrad fra NTNU. Han har jobbet som javakonsulent siden 2005 og har erfaring fra en lang rekke prosjekter. Kristian har stor sans for håndverksmessig kvalitet og har nylig anvendt denne sansen i et forretningskritisk sikkerhetssystem der kvalitet er helt avgjørende.

Christian is a passionate programmer currently working at gitorious.org where he does everything from JavaScript to Ruby to Unix systems tuning. He is the author of "Test-Driven JavaScript Development", and he maintains several open source projects, including the recently released test-framework Buster.JS and the popular mocking framework Sinon.JS. After dark you may find him tinkering with his Emacs setup, coding Lisp and slowly being devoured by the world of functional programming.

Carlos Sanchez is specialized in automation and quality of software development, QA and operations processes, from build tools and continuous integration to deployment automation, speaking on the subject in several conferences around the world. Involved in Open Source for nearly ten years, he is a member of the Apache Software Foundation amongst other open source groups, contributing to several projects, like Apache Maven. Currently works as Architect at MaestroDev, a company focusing on development and DevOps tools, from his home in Spain.

Marcus Ahnve is a Senior Consultant at Valtech, a global IT consultancy. He is a agile coach and developer helping software development organizations. Marcus experience in agile software development dates back to 1996 and his first project which was done in Smalltalk. In 2001 he started doing XP development and has since then explored new ways of making development more effective, economical and fun. Marcus is one of the founders of the community conference on agile methods Agila Sverige held yearly in Stockholm.

Angelika Langer works as an independent trainer with a curriculum of Java and C++ courses. She enjoys speaking at conferences all over the world, including JavaOne, OOPLSA, JAX and ACCU to name a few. Her teaching focuses on advanced C++ and Java programming, concurrency, and performance tuning. She is co-author of a column named "Effective Java" published in the German magazine JavaMagazin and author of the Java Generics FAQs online. Further information can be found at http://www.AngelikaLanger.com.

James Stewart is a software developer based in London with his wife and two small kids. Having been building things for the web since the mid-90s, he was technical lead for Alpha.gov.uk and now works as a technical architect for the Government Digital Service helping shape a new open-source platform for the UK Government.

Jon Are Rakvåg took his MSc at the Selmer Institute for Secure and Reliable Communication at the University of Bergen. After starting off as a information security consultant, he made the switch to full time developer (and security geek) at Capgemini Norge AS, and is currently working for SpareBank 1. He is a Certified Information System Security Professional (CISSP) and a member of the norwegian Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP) chapter.

Eirik currently holds the position of Chief Scientist at Kantega, a Norwegian employee-owned IT consulting company. Eirik is constantly on the lookout for smarter technology and leaner processes that may help us produce software more effectively. From low-level byte code optimizations to company culture, Eirik loves to experiment and regularly presents what he finds at conferences such as JavaZone, Smidig and the Java Posse Rounup.

Glenn Bech manages the Inmeta Consulting Java team and works hands-on in software development projects. He has developed software on the Java platform , mainly server side, for the banking and insurance industry for the last ten years. For Glenn, as for many a developer, it all started 20 years ago with “Poke 53281,0″ on the Commodore 64. Since then, he has programmed a wide range of languages. The first of his now several Android applications was published on the Android market in february 2011. He saw the fun and potential in tablet devices and was quick to embrace Honeycomb and later Ice Cream Sandwich. He is now a very passionate Android developer. Glenn is the co-founder of the Norwegian software comminity Baksia (www.baksia.org) that is non-profit and promotes everything scalable and backend related.

Chris Richardson is a developer and architect with over 20 years of experience. He is a Java Champion and the author of POJOs in Action, which describes how to build enterprise Java applications with POJOs and frameworks such as Spring and Hibernate. Chris is the founder of the original CloudFoundry.com and now spends his time investigating better ways to develop applications and evangelizing Cloud Foundry. He has a computer science degree from the University of Cambridge in England and lives in Oakland, CA with his wife and three children.

Ellen makes a living by coding Scala at Knowit in Oslo. Her interests include programming languages and functional programming. She is also an active member of Hackeriet, the Oslo hackerspace.

Torbjørn Vatn er seniorkonsulent og fagleder for “Scala & JVM”-faggruppa i Bekk Consulting. Har vært interessert i Scala og alternative JVM-språk i del år. Fra mars i fjor har han jobbet heltid på et prosjekt som bruker Scala og Lift som teknologi.

Stein Inge leder BEKK sin faggruppe for Kontinuerlige Leveranser og DevOps og jobber for tiden som tech lead for teamet som utvikler Digipost. Med bakgrunn som både drifter og utvikler er han spesielt interessert i å bygge bro mellom drift og utvikling. Han har tidligere holdt foredrag på blant andre JavaZone, Smidig og Roots.
Sveinung jobber som utvikler hos BEKK. For tiden fokuserer han på Kontinuerlige leveranser og DevOps, og hvordan man gjennom dette kan forbedre kvaliteten på produktet og redusere "waste". Han har tidligere presentert på Smidig og Akademy.

Christian is a passionate programmer currently working at gitorious.org where he does everything from JavaScript to Ruby to Unix systems tuning. He is the author of Test-Driven JavaScript Development, and he maintains several open source projects, including the recently released test-framework Buster.JS and the popular mocking framework Sinon.JS. After dark you may find him tinkering with his Emacs setup, coding Lisp and slowly being devoured by the world of functional programming.
Jeg heter Magnar og er en glad framsieutvikler. Jeg er deleier i Kodemaker, jobber til daglig hos FINN, og om kvelden utvikler jeg blant annet eventyrspillet Adventur Delux, pomodoro-verktøyet mytomatoes.com og en screencast om at emacs rocker. Jeg har også en blogg med screencasts om testdrevet javascript, zombier og mafia på zombietdd.com.

Nathaniel T. Schutta is a senior software engineer focussed on making usable applications. A proponent of polyglot programming, Nate has written two books on Ajax and speaks regularly at various worldwide conferences, No Fluff Just Stuff symposia, universities, and Java user groups. In addition to his day job, Nate is an adjunct professor at the University of Minnesota where he teaches students to embrace dynamic languages.

Ole-Martin Mørk er ansatt som Scientist i Bekk Consulting med eksplisitt fokus på Cloud og noSQL. Han har jobbet som utvikler siden 2000, stort sett i BEKK. Han har vært involvert i en stor mengde prosjekter både for offentlig og privat sektor og vært borte i det meste av sql-databaser. Siden 2008 har han hatt fokus på cloud og nosql og har etterhvert bygd opp god erfaring på bruk av teknologien. Han har holdt en rekke presentasjoner om emnene de siste årene.

A Java developer, born in Java island of Indonesia, with 6 years of development experience in various projects. A software craftsmanship enthusiast. A user of GTD since my student days.

Tim is a full-stack generalist and passionate teacher who loves working with people as much as he loves to code. He is a GitHubber (https://github.com/blog/1216-tim-berglund-is-a-githubber) whose mission is to make it easy for everybody in the world to use Git. He is a speaker internationally and on the No Fluff Just Stuff (http://nofluffjuststuff.com) tour in the United States, and loves to speak on Git and a variety of other topics. He is co-president of the Denver Open Source User Group (http://denveropensource.org), co-presenter of the best-selling O'Reilly Git Master Class (http://bit.ly/ogitvid), co-author of Building and Testing with Gradle (http://www.amazon.com/dp/144930463X), a member of the O'Reilly Expert Network (http://oreilly.com/pub/expert/timberglund), and a member of the GigOM Pro Analyst Network (http://pro.gigaom.com/members/timberglund/profile). He occasionally blogs at timberglund.com. He lives in Littleton, CO, USA with the wife of his youth and their three children.

Truls har tidligere jobbet som foreleser for dataingeniører og sett behovet for å få tilbakemelding fra publikum underveis i en presentasjon.

Rustam Mehmandarov har mange års erfaring som utvikler, teknisk prosjektleder og leveranseansvarlig. Han har interesse for smidig utvikling, webutvikling, arkitektur og geografiske informasjonssystemer. På fritiden er han veldig glad i å trene, når han ikke sitter i en mørk kjeller og koder Python og Java. Ellers er han over gjennomsnittet glad i Linux, selv om han også er på en veldig god fot med Windows.

Shai has been developing software professionally for the past 20 years and worked with Sun Microsystems since 2000. He has worked on countless projects from enterprise to desktop/consumer to mobile with many major corporations around the world. In mobile Shai was on the team that worked on the first DoCoMo Java Phone, the first mobile development kit from Sun and as the co-founder of the open source Codename One project.

Seth is a web engineer and works on the Dart team as a Developer Advocate for Google. He has produced conferences, written books, and he loves badminton.

Mark Addy currently works as a Senior Consultant at C2B2 a UK Java consultancy which specializes in building fast, scalable and reliable systems. He has extensive experience delivering development, troubleshooting, problem analysis and performance tuning services to clients spanning a wide range of industries. Mark has spoken at JUDCon Boston and the London JBoss User Group and will be speaking at GeeCon 2013 in May.

Jonas Bonér is a geek, programmer, speaker, musician, writer and Java Champion. He is the CTO and co-founder of Typesafe and is an active contributor to the Open Source community; most notably founded the Akka Project and the AspectWerkz AOP compiler (now AspectJ). Learn more at: http://jonasboner.com

Eirik Berg Maus is a senior developer at Nets, and has presented at Javazone several times.

Tim is a full-stack generalist and passionate teacher who loves working with people as much as he loves to code. He is a [GitHubber](https://github.com/blog/1216-tim-berglund-is-a-githubber) whose mission is to make it easy for everybody in the world to use Git. He is a speaker internationally and on the [No Fluff Just Stuff](http://nofluffjuststuff.com) tour in the United States, and loves to speak on Git and a variety of other topics. He is co-president of the [Denver Open Source User Group](http://denveropensource.org), co-presenter of the best-selling [O&apos;Reilly Git Master Class](http://bit.ly/ogitvid), co-author of [Building and Testing with Gradle](http://www.amazon.com/dp/144930463X), a member of the [O&apos;Reilly Expert Network](http://oreilly.com/pub/expert/timberglund), and a member of the [GigOM Pro Analyst Network](http://pro.gigaom.com/members/timberglund/profile). He occasionally blogs at [timberglund.com](http://timberglund.com). He lives in Littleton, CO, USA with the wife of his youth and their three children.

Hi, I'm Christin. I'm married, have 2 kids, a dog and a rabbit. I live in Drammen and work at Husbanken. I've been programming for money for 13 years now in all sorts of environments. I've worked for startups and large international companies. As a consultant and a full time employee. Building code from scratch and using standard frameworks. I enjoy sharing my experiences (http://vimeo.com/28885655, http://vimeo.com/49484333), I hope you'll enjoy listening.

Utvikler i Iterate, synes det er viktig at versjonskontroll blir gjort på en god måte og da er ikke veien langt til en stor interesse for git. Ivar har i flere prosjekter hjulpet andre utviklere til en bedre forståelse og bruk av git.

Stefan is a founder and principal consultant at innoQ, where he spends his time alternating between advising customers on new technologies and taking the blame from his co-workers for doing so. He is a frequent speaker at conferences and author of numerous articles. Twitter: @stilkov

David joined Axiomatics in January 2010 to focus on customer deployments and pre-sales. Previously, he had worked for 5 years at BT (British Telecom) in the United Kingdom in the Security Architectures Center. His main area of expertise is SOA security and governance. David has published several papers and contributed to several books on the topic of SOA security and governance. David has been a member of the XACML Technical Committee and the Trust Elevation Committee at OASIS since 2010. In the XACML TC, David is focusing on developer adoption through the development of a JSON-based profile for XACML. David holds a Master’s of Engineering from the French National Institute of Applied Sciences, INSA Lyon. He is also a Sun Certified Architect (SCEA) and a Certified Security Testing Professional (CSTP).

Øyvind jobber som utvikler hos Knowit i Oslo. I ca. to år har han jobbet på et stort offentlig enterprise Javaprosjekt hvor han mellom vanlige utviklingsoppgaver har brukt tid på å strømlinjeforme utviklingsmiljøet.

Peter Norrhall is Chief Architect at Extenda where he continuously tries to improve the software products, processes and people. Peter has been working for 20 years with software and system development and architecture with a broad range of technologies.

Stuart Sierra is a developer at Relevance, Inc., a member of Clojure/core, and the co-author of &quot;Practical Clojure&quot; (Apress, 2010) and &quot;ClojureScript: Up and Running&quot; (O&apos;Reilly, 2012). He has been involved with many open-source technologies including Clojure, ClojureScript, Ruby on Rails, Hadoop, and Solr.

Heinz Kabutz is the author of the Java Specialists Newsletter, where he researches Java constructs. He regularly investigates techniques for writing better, faster concurrent Java code. He has also published courses on Java and specifically on concurrency.

Atle Prange er senior systemutvikler i Kantega. Han har 10 år som profesjonell java-utivkler bak seg, og har de siste årene krydret hverdagen sin med Scala og CoffeeScript.

Eg har jobba i Knowit i 12 år, og har i denne perioden jobbet med vidt forskjellige prosjekter og kunder. Veldig mykje store statlige og halvstatlige bedrifter som NSB, Statens Vegvesen og DSB. De siste tre årene har eg jobba med den aktuelle kunden, og har hatt daglig forvaltning av systemet, og har vore sentral i analysefasen av prosjektet.

Ken Sipe is a Sr. Principal at Trexin, an application architect, frequent technical speaker, author of several articles and courses, and software and methodology mentor. He is founder of CodeMentor, Inc., focusing on training and mentor in distributed computing technologies. Ken has delivered hundreds of private and public presentations including JavaOne, JavaZone and NFJS.

Gerrit is a software engineer with more than 8 years of experience in software development. His current interests include JavaFX, HTML5 and Swing especially development of custom controls in one of these technologies. He is also interested in Java driven embedded technologies like BeagleBoard and Raspberry PI. He is a true believer in open source and has participated in popular projects like JFXtras as well as his own projects (SteelSeries Swing, SteelSeries Canvas). He is an active member of the Java community, where he founded and lead the Java User Group MÃ¼nster (Germany) and co leads the JavaFX community. He is an international speaker at conferences and user groups.

Trond Marius jobber som utvikler, teamleder, teknolog og sjefskonsulent i Mesan. Han har lang erfaring med Javabasert systemutvikling. De siste årene har han fulgt Scala tett og har brukt språket i flere prosjekter. Trond Marius leter konstant etter effektive løsninger og ny teknologi som gjør hverdagen som utvikler enklere.

Jaromir Hamala is a Senior Consultant at C2B2 Consulting Ltd. – Java middleware consultancy focusing on non-functional requirements of systems. Jaromir wrote his first line of code when he was 7 years old. Since then, he was always interested in &quot;How this system works under the hood?’. Jaromir is an expert on JVM, Spring Framework and Liferay. He has spoken at Devoxx 2012, Liferay Conference Prague 2012, Software Summer Camp 2011 and JBoss User Group London.

Etter tre år som konsulent der arbeidet handlet om alt fra tunge, databasesentrerte serverside-applikasjoner til javascript frontend, har Ola det siste året slått seg ned i NRK. Der har han jobbet med mobiltilpasning av websider og apputvikling for iOS og Android. Som litt over gjennomsnittlig interessert i både gadgets og media har han funnet seg godt til rette og hadde hatt en perfekt hverdag dersom det ikke var for disse hersens brukerene og de idiotiske dingsene de insisterer på å bruke.

Alf Thomas is the Tech Lead for FINN.no's mobile apps team. He has worked at FINN.no for three years and has a total of eight years experience as a Java developer.

Trisha is a developer at MongoDB, where she maintains the Java driver. She has expertise in Java high performance systems, is passionate about enabling developer productivity, and has a wide breadth of industry experience from the 12 years she's been a professional developer. Trisha is a leader in the London Java Community, and involved in the Graduate Development Community, she believes we shouldn't all have to make the same mistakes again and again.

Jobber hos Nets Norway AS som arkitekt og ornitolog og er ansvarlig for å levere sikre og stabile systemer med høy endringsgrad. Skyter fugl på fritiden.
Jobber hos Nets Norway AS som utvikler og taxidermist og jobber daglig med å introdusere feil i systemet for å holde Kråka aktiv. Har planer om å ta jegerprøven.

Alexander har nylig begynt som utvikler i FINN. Før det har han jobbet som konsulent med internsystemer innen forsikring. Han har en mastergrad ved Monash University i Melbourne hvor han spesialiserte seg innen distribuerte systemer og var involvert i forskning innen trådløse sensornettverk.

Har 9 års erfaring fra spillbransjen og har utviklet titler som Conan og The secret World. Begynte som konsulent i Computas i 2013 og ser klare paralleller mellom de to bransjene. Er opptatt av innovasjon, nye teknologier og liker å gjøre programmering kult. Kommer fra en bransje der brukerne har ekstreme krav til fleksibilitet, noe som farger hans syn på hvordan ting skal gjøres.

Espen Fossen jobber som sikkerhetssjef og utvikler i Kantega. Har de siste årene jobbet med sikkerhet og utvikling for flere større virksomheter i Norge. Ved siden av sikkerhet er Espen er opptatt av å prøve ut ny teknologi, og spesielt den som kan by på bedre og sikrere løsninger. Espen sitter for tiden som leder for programkomiteen for Sikkerhet og Sårbarhet, en sikkerhetskonferanse som arrangeres årlig i regi av Dataforeningen.

Eivind jobber som fagsjef for Java i BEKK og har mange års erfaring som arkitekt og utvikler for Java-baserte løsninger. De siste årene har han jobbet hovedsaklig med systemer for mottak og prosessering av store datamengder. Eivind er lidenskapelig opptatt av programmering og hvordan man kan løse tekniske utfordringer på best mulig måte. Han har holdt presentasjoner på mange tidligere JavaZone-konferanser.

Filip van Laenen er sjefsteknolog hos Computas. Han har mer enn femten år erfaring i IT-industrien, og har jobbet som både utvikler, teknisk prosjektleder og fagleder for sikkerhet og software engineering. Han er spesielt interessert i sikkerhet, kryptografi og kodekvalitet. I 2011 implementerte han komponentene for å verifisere e-valg, og vil sannsynligvis gjøre det samme igjen til Stortingsvalget i år.

Vidar jobber som sjefskonsulent hos Mesan AS. Han er en teknisk arkitekt og programmerer med 16 års erfaring i bransjen, og var før det en ivrig hobbyprogrammerer allerede fra en alder av 10 år. Ren og effektiv kode samt tilsvarende arkitektur har hele tiden vært en pasjon, selv om erfaringene tilsier at omverdenen ofte vektlegger helt andre aspekter når det kommer til stykket. Han har jobbet med både front-end og back-end i sitt virke, men har fått sin favoritt i området hvor logikken får bli på sitt mest ubesudlede.

Gunnar er Java-konsulent hos jPro AS og har mange års erfaring med utvikling av brukergrensesnitt. Han er opptatt av å bruke testing som dokumentasjon og hjelpemiddel for å forstå problemdomenet som en helhet, og er pådriver for BDD og TDD for å skape solide og vedlikeholdbare komponenter. Foruten koding på dagtid, og hobbykoding og familieliv på kveldstid, bruker Gunnar sin resterende tid på å drikke øl og se motorsport.

Over 20 years experience as an IT-consultant and CTO, both in Norway and internationally. Expert resource for a lot of large java and open source products since 1995. Speaker at local and international conferences, teacher and presenter at company-internal courses throughout Europa and an ambassador for sharing experiences and knowledge. Has experience with a lot of business domains through a lot of different projects. Currently working for Webstep in Norway. Focus on enterprise- and solution architecture, coaching development teams and delivering cloud-based solutions on open source and java platforms.

Uwe Friedrichsen travels the IT world for many years. As CTO of codecentric he can live out his curiosity about new ideas and concepts as well as his joy at thinking differently. His current focus areas are distributed, highly scalable systems and agile architecture. Often, you can find him on conferences sharing his ideas, or as author of articles, blog posts, tweets and more.

Consultant at Arktekk. Despot of HTTPCache4j, frequent speaker of HTTP-like subjects. REST-advocate. Dabbles with serveral languages, like Scala, Clojure and Haskell. Clearly a "dys"functional programmer ;)

Eirik currently holds the position of Chief Scientist at Kantega, a Norwegian employee-owned IT consulting company. Eirik is constantly on the lookout for smarter technology and leaner processes that may help us produce software more effectively. From low-level byte code optimizations to company culture, Eirik loves to experiment and regularly presents what he finds at conferences such as JavaZone, Smidig and the Java Posse Rounup.

Stian Grenborgen har akkurat startet i Steria, men har en bakgrunn som programmerer og systemarkitekt i Nets.

Yves is a full stack software craftsman with a passion for software architecture and product development. He is a certified Scrum Master but a developer at heart. Currently working in Varnish Software AS as a Product Manager for the commercial tool offerings, Yves is opinionated about advocating for a development culture of agile, test driven, peer review, and strong mentorship. Don’t let the title fool you, as Yves part take in frontline support for Varnish Cache and codes daily. He primarily programs in Java, Javascript and dabbles in a bit of C. Yves lives in Oslo, with his awesome partner and two brilliant children.

Ernst Riemer is a full stack software engineer at Xtreme Labs where he focuses on web technology. A believer of polyglot programming, Ernst uses many languages and frameworks including C, Ruby, Java, JavaScript, Ruby on Rails, various Java frameworks, Sencha Touch, AngularJS. He is an advocate for using the correct tools for the job, and is always looking to learn new things! He has lead development on high traffic web sites, restful web services and mobile html5 applications.

Johannes is the Oslo based Chief Scientist for the Sri Lanka based company Exilesoft. He trains distributed teams and contributes to projects halfway across the world. He is an active contributor to the programmer community in Oslo and Sri Lanka and a veteran speaker in Norway and abroad.
Roy Fernando is a tech lead at Exilesoft in Sri Lanka where he works with Java and JavaScript-programming. He's in Norway to pay a visit to his current customer,

Anders er systemutvikler og medeier i Kantega AS, sivilingeniør i Industriell Matematikk, med spesialisering innen abstrakt algebra. Han brenner for enkle løsninger.

Ken Sipe is a Sr. Principal at Trexin, an application architect, frequent technical speaker, author of several articles and courses, and software and methodology mentor. He is founder of CodeMentor, Inc., focusing on training and mentor in distributed computing technologies. Ken has delivered hundreds of private and public presentations including JavaOne, JavaZone and NFJS.

Agile minimalist with a taste for getting to the bottom of things. Apache member, Maven PMC, Codehaus, Selenium Committer.

Svein Otto er senior systemutvikler hos Kantega AS. Han har hatt systemutvikling som levebrød i over 30 år. Han har de siste 12 år programmert Java, med innslag av JavaScript, AspectJ, JavaCC, Groovy og Scala. Tidligere år i C/C++, Mary, Pascal, Simula, Lisp, Prolog. Svein Otto har spesiell interesse for programmeringsspråk.

Ulf Lilleengen is a developer at Yahoo! working on a web scale serving platform that delivers relevant content and ads throughout the Yahoo! network.

Robert has worked in senior technical and management roles for several software companies providing tools in the energy sector for dealing with the masses of information flowing from today’s digital oil fields. He has dealt daily with understanding, designing, advocating and implementing effective architectures for sophisticated scientific and engineering software in Python, C++, C# and F#. He suspects there’s might be something profoundly “right” about Haskell, but keeps making stuff that “just works” in Python anyway. Robert is a regular speaker at conferences, meetups and corporate software events and can be found speaking about topics as diverse as behavioural microeconomics in software architecture to implementing web services on 8-bit microcontrollers. He is organiser of the Oslo Python group and holds a Ph.D. in a natural science. Robert has recently founded Sixty North, a software product and consulting business operating throughout Europe and based in Norway.

Jan Kronquist is a consultant at Jayway and has worked with everything from games, large enterprise systems and mobile phone applications. He has been writing Java code for over 16 years and is still a huge fan of the platform and the community, although Clojure is now his favorite language. He is the founder of the open source testing frameworks PowerMock and Awaitility.

Jobbet som utvikler og system-arkitekt i Telenor i 8 år før jeg gikk inn i CMS-verdenen hos Enonic for 4 år siden. Det første jeg tar backup av er .bashrc-fila min.

Nilanjan is a consultant/trainer and core member of Play framework. He works for Typesafe. He has more than 12 years of experience managing and developing software solutions in Java, Ruby, Groovy and also in Scala. He is zealous about programming in Scala ever since he got introduced to this beautiful language. He enjoys sharing his experience via talks in various conferences and he is also the author of the “Scala in Action” book.

Johannes is the Oslo based Chief Scientist for the Sri Lanka based company Exilesoft. He trains distributed teams and contributes to projects halfway across the world. He is an active contributor to the programmer community in Oslo and Sri Lanka and a veteran speaker in Norway and abroad.

Ivar has been in the trenches for 6 years, most of which has been spent on various forms of frontend development, ranging from clunky old JSPs to spine-crippling Flex/ActionScript and pure HTML/Javascript. The last couple of years has been spent working on HTML5 browser-applications using Backbone.js and Angular.js He currently works at WebStep, likes to play in the snow and is convinced that the Norwegian winter lasts from November to August as long as you're willing to drive far enough. And Ivar usually is.

Peter af Geijerstam is a software developer who specializes in computer security. He has been doing software development for over 15 years and has experience from small businesses, large-scale telecom and computer security for government agencies. Peter believes in solving problems, not using any particular technology. He currently works as a software consultant for factor10 where he works to bring security-awareness to software developers. Peter is on twitter as @p4fg and blogs on http://www.shellcode.se

Master i Datateknikk fra NTNU og jobber som utvikler hos BEKK i Trondheim. Arbeider primært med webteknologi, med et dykk i stacken nå og da. Interessert i alt som kan gjøre utviklerhverdagen enklere og mer effektiv.

Bodil is a compulsive conference speaker in the fields of functional programming and internets technologies, and is a co-organiser of three annual developer conferences in her home town of Oslo, Norway, mostly because she’s still learning how to stop. She is a prolific contributor to the Free Software community, primarily as a Clojure developer, and has recently taken up designing new programming languages as a hobby. In her spare time, she works as a web developer for Comoyo, which is like Hulu for non-Americans.

Johan Haleby is a Swedish developer, speaker, and writer with a profound interest in software engineering and testability in particular. He has founded and contributed to numerous open source projects such as PowerMock, REST Assured and Awaitility and has spoken at several conferences and user groups such as Öredev and Devoxx.

Brian McCallister joined Groupon as CTO of Platform in August, 2013. Prior to Groupon, he was Principal Architect and Distinguished Engineer at Ning, where he was responsible for directing and communicating the technical big picture across the organization. He joined Ning originally as a Core Architect when it was just a tiny startup and watched it grow to over two hundred people. At the Apache Software Foundation, Brian has served on the Board of Directors and as PMC Chairs for the DB and ActiveMQ projects. With the ASF he focused on pushing for greater project autonomy, and mentoring and shepherding a number of projects into the foundation, including Cassandra, Mesos, and Jclouds. In his broader past, Brian has worked variously as an engineering manager, technical writer, and systems administrator on projects ranging from internal platforms to loom control drivers. He is also a great mentor, and takes a vested interest in developing other engineers in the organization to help turn them into great engineers. Brian holds an MS in Education and BA in English both from Bucknell University.

Sven Peters is a software geek working as an ambassador for Atlassian. He has been developing Java applications for over 12 years and leading small teams using lean methodologies. Sven likes effective software development and cares about the motivation of developers.

Trond Arve Wasskog er utvikler, arkitekt og CTO i Bekk Consulting. Han har jobbet med utvikling på Java-plattformen i hele sin karrière, og satt sentralt både i PoC-en og i MAG-prosjektet.

Darren Hague is an engineering architect in SAP Global IT's Cloud Centre of Excellence. He has spent the last 10 years working in the area of identity management and single-sign on, specialising in the use of Java in the SAP ecosystem. Although his title says Architect he writes code more often than he writes PowerPoint slides, and he has spent the last couple of years working in an agile team using Contnuous Delivery to build a core component of SAP's cloud offering, the SAP ID Service. A speaker at Java and SAP conferences, he is also a SAP Mentor alumnus, co-organiser of annual SAP Inside Track London events, and author of the SAP Press book "Universal Worklist with SAP NetWeaver Portal".

Ragne Elisabeth Henriksen har en sivilingeniørgrad i Industriell Matematikk fra NTNU. Hun skrev masteroppgave om anonymitet i mobil kommunikasjon og er spesielt interessert i sikkerhet. Etter endt studie begynte hun å jobbe som IT-konsulent for Visma Consulting. Der har hun jobbet siden sommeren 2012. Hun jobber for tiden med forvaltning av nettsidene til Norad og Norsk Filminstitutt gjennom Enonic CMS. Hun er en frontendutvikler som hovedsakelig jobber med design, arkitektur og programmering i javascript, XSLT, HTML5 og CSS3.

Erling is the founder of the norwegian startup CV Partner AS - providing simplified CV management for consultancies. Besides being an entrepreneur, (which involves mastering a wide range of roles - spanning from CFO to product manager), he is a passionate developer who prefers to work with cutting edge technology. Having real-life international experience with everything from Kanban to Lean Startup, he is beyond being religious about process and methodologies, and is now more pragmatic and context-aware than ever.

Alain Defrance is currently working at BitTitan Inc. (http://www.bittitan.com) as core developer. Prior to BitTitan, Alain was project lead at eXo platform and used to contribute to open source projects like GateIn, CRaSH, Chromattic and wikbook.
Julien Viet leads product development of eXo Platformâs flagship eXo Portal product on which the entire eXo product line is based. In June 2009, eXo Portal was merged with JBoss Portal to create GateIn, which Julien now co-leads. In this role, he is deeply involved in GateInâs technical vision and plays a key role in product development and advanced R&D architecture prototyping. Prior to eXo, Julien was an engineer at JBoss, where he founded the JBoss Portal project in 2004. In four years, Julien built an enterprise-class portal server with a team of only five developers. He started contributing to the JBoss project (application server) in 2002 and joined JBoss, Inc. two years later. Julien is passionate about open source and active in standards groups. In his spare time, he started the Chromattic project, an advanced Object to Java Content Repository (JCR) mapping framework that now underpins the GateIn project. He is also an expert group member for several Java specifications, including Portlet 2.0 (JSR-286), Content Repository for Java Technology API 2.0 (JSR-283) and Portlet Bridge for JavaServer Faces (JSR-301). Julien holds an engineering degree from Institut National des TÃ©lÃ©communications, one of Franceâs top schools for engineering.

Henrik har en mastergrad i Informatikk fra Universetet i Oslo, og har jobbet ett år som konsulent i BEKK Consulting hvor han jobber som Java-utvikler. Som medlem av faggruppen Programmeringsspråk har han også en interesse for alternative språk og programmeringsparadigmer.

Henrik Olsson is a Lead Developer and Product Owner at SmartBear Software. The last years he has been working exclusively on software that uses JavaFX to its full extent, including leading the project of converting 30 000 lines worth of JavaFX 1 to JavaFX 2.

Alex er sivilingeniør i datateknikk fra NTNU, med fordypning i databaser og søkemotorer, bl.a. med masteroppgave for FAST. Som med-gründer og utvikler i Found, en norsk leverandør av søk som en tjeneste, har han jobbet med søkeløsninger de siste syv årene – og Elasticsearch de siste to. Når han ikke hopper ut fra fly for å ta på skyer, drifter han og Found AS hundrevis av Elasticsearch-clustre i skyen - bl.a. for New York Public Library, TED og LiveNation.

Software developer at Idium AS.

Full-stack web developer at Kodemaker. Has built stuff for iOS, with Rails, on the JVM (mostly Clojure, some Groovy, very little Java). Likes user interface programming. Hopes to one day be able to take a year off to write a book about the history of the internet.

Jon-Anders Teigen is software developer from Oslo. He is a co-founder of ScalaBin and Oslo Socially Functional, is co-organizing the flatMap(Oslo) conference, and has previously been part of the JavaZone program committee. Jon-Anders is the author of Unfiltered-Directives.

Java backendutvikler som til vanlig jobber med enterprise java serverløsninger. Har mobilutvikling som en guilty pleasure, og har jobbet mer og mer med det de siste årene.

Trygve Laugstøl jobber som utvikler og fagsjef i Nets.
Joakim Blomskøld jobber som eneste utvikler i Profsys. Han har mer enn 10 års erfaring med Java og webutvikling.

Juniorkonsulent hos Nav for Visma Consulting. Har holdt på med utallige hobbyprosjekter i utallige forskjellige webrammeverk som aldri har kommet noe lenger enn utviklingsserveren. I det siste tenkt mange tanker om hvordan løfte hobbyprogrammeringen til nye høyder så jeg kan dra nytte av det i arbeidsdagen.

Passionate developer from the .NET camp. I currently work as a manager at BEKK Consulting where I am the .NET group lead. In the evenings I focus on trying out new things and one of those projects is a CQRS project I've done, https://github.com/mastoj/TJ.CQRS, where I also used event sourcing. During my years as an IT-consultant I have been working with a broad variety of languages and technologies. I have professional experience from java, perl, .NET, SAP and SAS BI.

Rune Høivik er utdannet sivilingeniør fra NTNU, og jobber som utvikler i Visma Consulting. Han har over 8 års erfaring med utvikling på javaplattformen og har deltatt på store prosjekter innefor både offentlig og privat sektor. Rune er genuint opptatt av kodekvalitet.

Jon er en utvikler med over 6 års erfaring, nå ansatt hos Knowit Objectnet. Er opptatt av å finne gode helhetlige løsninger, og har gjort dette på både store og små prosjekter. Trives like godt med front- og backend, og for tiden jobber han på Oslo Kommunes integrasjonsplattform med &quot;litt av alt&quot;.

Terje jobber i dag for WebStep, og har mer enn 10 års erfaring. Han har et sterkt engasjement for utvikling og applikasjonsarkitektur, og er opptatt av kunnskapsdeling og å skape verdi. Tidligere har Terje holdt lyntaler om "Kjenn ditt domene - bruk av verdiobjekter" (JavaZone 2011), "Ikke gå i luksusfellen" (Smidig 2011) og "Vertikal vs. horisontal inndeling av kode" (JavaZone 2012).

Mario works as a consultant at Miles. Mario's main focus areas are architecture, requirement engineering, and agile processes. Although Mario is currently working more with processes and methodology, he is has a strong interested in technology and technology trends. He often engages himself in discussions about innovation that can change the IT-industry. Mario has held presentations at JavaZone for several years, and has discusses many diferent topics such as: BPM and SOA, jBPM , Scrum and OpenSSO. Mario is the lead organizer(Board leader) of the Oslo Software Architecture Meetup.

Douglas Crockford

Dag Willy er "lead developer" på en stort javaprosjekt i Computas. Han har 12 års erfaring fra bransjen, og bred erfaring fra SOA-implementasjon, Java EE og Smalltalk.
Harald er teknisk prosjektleder i Computas. Han har jobbet med store javaprosjekter i 7 år, og er også fagleder for Java i bedriften.

Anders jobber som utvikler og arkitekt hos Miles i Oslo. Han har i det siste jobbet såpass mye med Bash og Linux at han har begynt å kalle seg for drifter. I utformingen av systemer er smidig systemutvikling viktig, og han forsøker å balansere effektivitet og hastighet med forutsigbarhet og stabilitet i produksjon. Han har erfaring fra små, store, bra og dårlige smidige prosjekter, men lærer stadig nye ting. Gjennom erfaringen med drift og ansvar i produksjon har han erfart hvor viktig det er å få hele verdikjeden til å spille sammen, ikke bare utvikle kjapt. Det finnes få ting som er så gøy som å legge ut noe i produksjon én dag, måle den neste, og legge ut en korreksjon den tredje dagen.

Tommy Bø is a senior consultant at Visma Consulting. He has more than eight years developing on the Java platform, and has always been advocating unit testing and other tools to increase the quality of software development.

Mario is a senior software engineer at Red Hat working at the development of the core of Drools, the JBoss rule engine. He has a huge experience as Java developer having been involved in (and often leading) many enterprise level projects in several industries ranging from media companies to the financial sector. Among his interests there are also functional programming and Domain Specific Languages. By leveraging these 2 passions he also created the open source library lambdaj with the purposes of providing an internal Java DSL for manipulating collections and allowing a bit of functional programming in Java.

Jostein har jobbet med Javautvikling i 9 år og har en genuin interesse for både Java og sikkerhet. Det siste året har Java-verden virkelig fått erfart at det finnes et viktig fagfelt som heter sikkerhet. Denne oppvåkningen fører forhåpentligvis til at både Java i seg selv og flere Java-applikasjoner blir sikrere enn i dag. Jostein hjelper til med å holde fokus på sikkerhet i Java-verden. Til daglig jobber han som Senior Software Engineer hos Steria.

Gavin King leads the Ceylon project at Red Hat. Gavin is the creator of Hibernate, a popular object/relational persistence solution for Java, and the Seam Framework, an application framework for enterprise Java. He&apos;s contributed to the Java Community Process as JBoss and then Red Hat representative for the EJB and JPA specifications and as lead of the CDI specification. Gavin now works full time on Ceylon, polishing the language specification, developing the compiler frontend, and thinking about the SDK and future of the platform. He&apos;s still a fan of Java, and of other languages, especially Smalltalk, Python, and ML.

Ingar Abrahamsen er utdannet elektroingeniør på HiO og jobber som utvikler hos Visma Consulting. Han har 3 års erfaring fra konsulentbransjen og har stor fokus på god kodekvalitet.

Kjell Ivar jobber i Visma Consulting, og har i 2 år jobbet med frontendutvikling via Enonic CMS for kunder som Norad, Norsk Filminstitutt og NAV. Utvikling av sidemaler via bruk av XML-datakilder, og transformering av dette til f.eks. HTML via XSLT og Xpath er en stor del av dette arbeidet. Kjell Ivar har ellers en stor interesse for interaksjonsdesign, HTML5, app-utvikling og javascriptrammeverk.

Leader of Center of Excellence - Databases, Evry ASA. Working as an architect and developer in Financial Services, EVRY. Started Java development after receiving a beta release of the first Java compiler early in the nineties. Worked with Oracle databases since version 7, and been an instructor on the Oracle Univiersity classes.

Nick Zeeb is a core Java developer at LMAX Exchange in London. LMAX operates a financial exchange that is capable of handling 20,000 orders per second with a mean latency of 1.5 milliseconds. Nick has been involved in the financial industry since 2006 and has seen some interesting times while working at a hedge fund, an investment bank and now an exchange.

Oleg is a Principal Architect with Hortonworks responsible for architecting scalable BigData solutions using various OpenSource technologies available within and outside the Hadoop ecosystem. Before Hortonworls Oleg was part of the SpringSource/VMWare where he was a core engineer working on Spring Integration framework, leading Spring Integration Scala DSL and contributing to other projects in Spring portfolio. He has 17+ years of experience in software engineering across multiple disciplines including software architecture and design, consulting, business analysis and application development. Oleg has been focusing on professional Java development since 1999. Since 2004 he has been heavily involved in using several open source technologies and platforms across a number of projects around the world and spanning industries such as Teleco, Banking, Law Enforcement, US DOD and others. As a speaker Oleg presented seminars at dozens of conferences worldwide (i.e.SpringOne, JavaOne, Java Zone, Jazoon, Java2Days, Scala Days, Uberconf, and others).

Kevlin is an independent consultant, trainer and writer based in the UK. His development interests are in patterns, programming, practice and process. He has been a columnist for various magazines and web sites and is co-author of A Pattern Language for Distributed Computing and On Patterns and Pattern Languages, two volumes in the Pattern-Oriented Software Architecture series. He is also editor of the 97 Things Every Programmer Should Know site and book.

Ed Burns is currently a senior staff engineer at Sun Microsystems, Inc., where he leads a team of Web experts from across the industry in developing JavaServer Faces Technology through the Java Community Process and in open source. He is the author of two books for McGraw-Hill: Secrets of the Rock Star Programmers (2008) and JavaServer Faces: The Complete Reference (co-authored with Chris Schalk, 2006). Before working on JavaServer Faces, Ed worked on a wide variety of client and server-side Web technologies since 1994, including NCSA Mosaic for X, Mozilla, the Sun Java Plug-in, Jakarta Tomcat, the Cosmo Create HTML authoring tool, and the Web transport layer in the Irix operating system from Silicon Graphics. Ed is a frequent speaker at international industry conferences, having presented many times at Sun’s JavaOne conference, given keynote addresses at the W-JAX conference in Munich, Germany, the Globalcode Developer’s Conference in Sao Paulo, Brazil, the JSF Days Conference in Vienna, Austria, the DOAG Conference in Nuremberg, Germany, and also has spoken at numerous Java User Group meetings and the No Fluff Just Stuff Java Symposium.

Cand. Scient (M.Sc equivalent) in Comp.Sci from the University of Oslo. Presently works as a senior software engineer at Comoyo. Has worked as a developer, research scientist etc. for several decades. Is interested in machine learning, enterprise architecture, functional programming, archery, film, TV, music and regular expression.

Jeg er en Kodemaker som har programmert siden Sharp MZ-721 var den kuleste datamaskinen man kunne ha på et gutterom (for den kom med kassettspiller, og vi kunne kopiere spill med pappas dobbelkassettspiller). Det var da spill kom i form av lange listinger i blader, som vi tastet inn, og det fantes kommandoer som het PEEK og POKE. Jeg mener at det er minst like viktig å ta vare på den store programmeringsgleden, som å programmere for å tjene til livets opphold.

I am one of those guys who just loves playing with technology, if I can automate something using a computer, give someone a better user experience, play with something new or if someone tells me something just can’t be done I have to get stuck straight in. Up until a year ago I lived in Ireland where I was born, raised, went to school, went to University (when I woke up on time) and worked as much as I possibly could from the day I was legally allowed to. I come from quite a different background than most. I started out as a developer in a Coal Fired power station in Ireland where I wrote ladder logic for PLC’s that controlled different parts of the power station and then wrote software that operators could use to control the power station. I moved on to a company called Liberty IT who are responsible for writing all the software for the American insurance giant Liberty Mutual. I wrote in house and external web app’s for Liberty, some of which had to be written to incorporate with existing systems that were written in Java and still using Struts version 1.0 and some were brand new systems that we were allowed to use much more modern technology. Seeking new challenges I followed my Norwegian Girlfriend to Norway and I now work in Statkraft as a developer writing software for the energy management department. I am also a keen motorbike racer that loves being able to incorporate my software knowledge into my mechanical knowledge when building new race bikes each year for the upcoming season. I have written my own data logging software and my own quick shifter using the popular micro-controller known as an Arduino. I talked at Smidig 2012 about motivating teams and I hope you join me to here about the more technical side of my job

Jobber til daglig som Manager og Fagleder for Java i Bekk Consulting As. Har jobbet i mange år med både utvikling av hyllevareprodukter og som konsulent for bedriftsmarkedet både i Norge og i utlandet. Lang erfaring med Linux, C, Python og Java. Jobber både som utvikler, arkitekt og teknisk prosjektleder.

Fredrik makes a living as a programmer and consultant, dealing mainly in Java EE development. The last couple of years he's become more and more interested in functional programming and in particluar how to apply what he learns to his daily job as a Java developer. He's held some training courses in Scala and also dabbled in Clojure, and likes to speak at conferences.

Ivar Grimstad is an experienced software architect with a strong focus on Enterprise Java. He has been working with Java since the beginning and has over the years tried out everything from lightweight mobile applications to large scale enterprise applications. His experience covers all aspects of designing architectures based on a variety of technologies including standard Java EE as well as more lightweight frameworks such as Spring and a variety of open source products. Ivar is always focusing on quality and on using the right tools and technologies for the right task to optimize the software development process. In addition to being active in the local Java Community, Ivar has been speaking at several conferences and gatherings in the Nordics. This year he is also presenting at JavaOne.

Jonathan is the project chair of Apache Cassandra and co-founder of DataStax. Prior to DataStax, he built a multi-petabyte, scalable storage system based on Reed-Solomon encoding for backup provider Mozy.

Erlend Flaten jobber som konsulent hos Antares Gruppen AS. Han har jobbet som utvikler siden 2005. Mye av arbeidet de siste årene har vært å oppgradere og videreutvikle forskjellige halvgamle systemer. Dette har inspirert til å finne frem til metoder å lage kode som er mest mulig hensiktsmessig for videre vedlikehold. Han jobber sammen med andre konsulenter fra Antares Gruppen AS for å samle erfaring for å jobbe effektivt med å håndtere teknisk gjeld.

Håvard har syslet med webteknologier siden Netscape 2.0 var hot, og har fulgt Mozilla-stiftelsen tett i mange år. Han har utviklet for flere forskjellige mobilplattformer, og har tro på at åpne plattformer kan rive ned &quot;hagemurene&quot; for mobilapplikasjoner.

Tobias er fagsjef i Know IT Objectnet. Han har 16 års erfaring fra konsulentbransjen hvor han stort sett har jobbet med utvikling av store mellomvareløsninger implementert i Java. Tobias har tidligere holdt foredrag på rOOts, JavaZone, Kunnskapstinget og flere andre konferanser. Han er styremeldem i dataforeningen østlandet. Tobias er tidligere styremedlem i javaBin og satt i JavaZones programkomite fra 2004-2009. Tre av disse årene fungerte han som leder.

Marvin er systemutvikler hos Kantega AS. Han er sivilingeniør i datateknikk med fordypning i intelligente systemer. Han startet som som Java-utvikler i 2007 da han ble med i studentavisa Under Dusken. Hans karriere i Kantega startet i 2009 hvor han jobbet deltid frem til han i 2011 fullførte mastergraden sin og fikk fast ansettelse. Han har jobbet med forvaltning og utvikling av flere store java-applikasjoner, blant annet CMSet som driver Trondheim kommunes nettsider og indeksering av disse.

Kenneth jobber i Accenture og har meir enn 10 års erfaring som utvikler, drifter og løsningsarkitekt. I dag jobber Kenneth med mykje spennande frontend- og backendteknologi i eit av dei største IT-prosjekta i Noreg. Han synest det har skjedd utrulig mykje spennande med webteknologien dei siste åra og at vi aldri har hatt betre verktøykasse for å kunne lage flotte og brukarvennlege webapplikasjonar.

Tom Johannes Bang is a passionate and visionary Owner and COO at the Norwegian Lean consultancy Iterate. He has more than 15 years of leadership and business consulting experience. He aims to help established enterprises escape the operational gravity and drive innovation and develop products and services that engage customers and bring them back. As a serial entrepreneur Tom founded Bekk Consulting in 2000 (one of Norway’s most successful IT consulting companies today), a dental clinic (Calia) in 2005 and Spanish tapas bar (Serrano´s Bodega) in 2010. Tom has presented at various Norwegian and International conferences.

Kim is a senior consultant at Bekk Consulting in Oslo, Norway. He primarily works on large-scale JavaScript applications and he strongly believes that we should treat JavaScript as a real language when we use it to build large applications. In addition to creating Superhero.js and blogging about JavaScript, Kim is a frequent contributor to open source and a semi-frequent speaker at events both in Norway and abroad.

Torstein har jobbet med systemutvikling i 12 år. Han har jobbet med flere store javaprosjekter der systemintegrasjon og kjøretidskontroll har vært viktige aspekter.

Joachim is the author of &quot;Ember.js in Action&quot;, currently available through Manning Publications early access program. He works as an independent consultant and course instructor through his company Haagen Software AS and has worked with various web technologies since 2006, ranging from JavaServer Pages, JavaServer Faces, SproutCore to Ember.js. He have been the technology lead for norways largest retail application (measured in volume) and know the pains that server–side generated markup and scripts can cause while trying to scale out a service. Joachim is the lead organizer of Ember Fest, a European Ember.js related conference.

Matthew McCullough works for GitHub, Inc. and trains audiences around the world on the most effective use of the Git version control system and GitHub collaboration platform. In supplement to travel-based teaching, he writes books and records videos for O'Reilly and Manning on the topics of delivering technical presentations, the use of modern build and continuous integration tools, and version control industry best practices.

Jan-Erik er sjefskonsulent og teamleder i Capgemini. Han har 7 års erfaring med utvikling og arkitektur på Java-plattformen. For tiden er han opptatt av temaer som NoSQL og økosystemet rundt Hadoop.

Martin Skarsaune is a software developer at Kantega. He has been programming full time since the turn of the century. His prime interest is core Java and programming languages. He has published a book on the technical aspects of Smalltalk to Java conversion.

Safurudin is a developer and tech lead of the Quality & Delivery group at Bekk Trondheim. With more than 10 years experience in creating web applications in various programming languages such as Ruby, Java and C#, he has a firm grip on the HTTP protocol and the many, both server and client side web application frameworks that utilize it. Safurudin is also a regular speaker and contributor in the local developer community and assistant chairman in the Trondheim chapter of Norwegian .NET User Group.

Nils Christian nyter å hjelpe team å levere software som gleder både brukere og sponsorer. Som konsulent er han å finne i ulike roller hvor han får praktisert dette gjennom coaching i smidig test- og utviklingsmetodikk, kravspesifisering, systemarkitektur og utvikling. Nils Christian er sivilingeniør fra NTNU og partner i Scienta.

Holger er utdannet sivilingeniør i datateknikk fra NTNU. Siden skolebenken har han jobbet i 3 år som konsulent i Bekk Consulting, hvor han nå er fagleder for programmeringsspråk. Han har også grunnlagt og vært med å utvikle slidifier.com.

Anders jobber i Steria som løsningsarkitekt og utvikler. Han har mer enn ti års erfaring som systemutvikler. Han brenner for å lage enkle løsninger til komplekse problemer, og er alltid på utkikk etter verktøy til å hjelpe han med dette. Etter å ha jobbet en del med Clojure har han funnet ut hvor gøy funksjonell programmering er og ønsker å dele dette med flere programmerere. Anders har tidligere holdt foredrag på blandt annet Javazone og Smidig konferansen.

Sveinung jobber til daglig som konsulent i BEKK. Som håndverker bryr han seg sterkt om kodekvalitet, testing og automatisering. Han har tidligere presentert på JavaZone, Smidig og Software. Det siste året har han sittet på et frontend-tungt prosjekt i en stor norsk bank. Applikasjonen var en single-page app skrevet i Backbone i et komplekst domene, med store views og høye krav til testing.

I am one of the co-founders of SoftwareMill, a company specialising in delivering customised software solutions. I code mostly using Scala and Java. I am involved in a number of open-source projects: as the founder and lead developer of Hibernate Envers, a Hibernate core module providing auditing capabilities, as well as the founder of ElasticMQ, Veripacks and MacWire; and as a contributor to SoftwareMill Bootstrap and xsbt-proguard-plugin. Apart from writing closed- and open-source software, I am interested in improving the way we use functional and object-oriented programming. When not coding, I enjoy spending time with my family, hiking in the mountains or playing tennis. My blog: http://www.warski.org/blog

Lars jobber som utvikler hos Iterate og prøver å bruke Clojure der det er mulig.

James Lewis is a Principal Consultant for ThoughtWorks based in the UK and a member of the ThoughtWorks Technical Advisory Board. Most recently he has been helping to introduce Agile at various blue chip companies: Investment Banks, Publishers and media organizations. Most recently, James has been spending his time helping ThoughtWorks' clients develop enterprise software as a coding architect.

Axel Fontaine is a software development expert and independent consultant based in Munich. He specializes in Continuous Delivery and hates complexity with a passion. He is the founder and the project lead of Flyway, the agile database migration framework for Java. He regularly speaks at technical conferences. You can find him online at axelfontaine.com and on Twitter as @axelfontaine.

Jan Henrik er Cand. scient. og har 15 års erfaring med serverside Java-teknologi, både J2EE og lettvektsrammeverk. Han jobber i dag for Knowit som teknisk prosjektleder, arkitekt og utvikler for et større offentlig IT-prosjekt. Jan Henrik er fagleder for DevOps i Knowit og en ivrig lettvekts-fantast som forsøker å jobbe mot smidige arkitekturer og løsninger.
Rune har i sine drøye 10 år i bransjen jobbet mye med arkitektur og utvikling på Java-plattform i større enterprise systemer. Både på klient- og serverside, og både med tunge J2EE-servere og lettvektsrammeverk. Idag jobber han for Knowit som teknisk-/løsningsarkitekt og utvikler på et større offentlig IT-prosjekt.

Ali is Soundrop's CTO and leads the development of Soundrop's Erlang-based real-time social listening platform. Before joining Soundrop, Ali worked for Cisco and TANDBERG where he built enterprise video conferencing and telepresence systems. It was at TANDBERG/Cisco that he began working with Erlang, using the language to help devise a video-enabled social network and communication system. A long-time supporter of - and contributor to - open source projects, Ali has worked on GNOME, GStreamer and the Vala programming language among others. He also has deep experience with real-time communication protocols like XMPP. Ali began his studies at INSA Rennes before moving on to IIT Bombay; he received his masters in computer science from INSA Lyon. He speaks English, French, Arabic as well as elementary Norwegian.

Nathaniel T. Schutta is a solution architect focussed on making usable applications. A proponent of polyglot programming, Nate has written two books on Ajax and speaks regularly at various worldwide conferences, No Fluff Just Stuff symposia, universities, and Java user groups. In addition to his day job, Nate is an adjunct professor at the University of Minnesota where he teaches students to embrace dynamic languages. Most recently, Nate coauthored the book Presentation Patterns with Neal Ford and Matthew McCullough.

Alf-Kenneth Aabel jobber i Decisive AS som seniorkonsulent hvor hans fokus er regelbaserte løsninger. Han har jobbet med slike løsninger i det offentlige siden 2006 og tenker alltid på hvordan beslutninger kan spesifiseres og implementeres. Et viktig mål for ham er å øke effektiviteten i løsninger ved hjelp av automatiserte beslutninger. Likhet for loven er et viktig prinsipp for ham. Før han ble en "regelrytter" jobbet han i mange år med med Javabaserte løsninger. Han er alltid nyskjerrig etter å forstå hvordan nye metoder og løsningsprinsipper kan bidra til bedre løsninger.

Ian Robinson works on research and development for future versions of the Neo4j graph database, having previously served as Neo Technology’s Director of Customer Success, where he worked with customers to design and develop graph database solutions. He is a coauthor of 'Graph Databases' and 'REST in Practice' (O’Reilly), and a contributor to 'REST: From Research to Practice' (Springer) and 'Service Design Patterns' (Addison-Wesley). He blogs at http://iansrobinson.com, and tweets at @iansrobinson.

Jeremy Deane has over 18 years of software engineering experience in leadership positions. His expertise includes Enterprise Integration Architecture, Web Application Architecture, and Software Process Improvement. In addition, he is an accomplished speaker and technical author.

Hadi Hariri is a Developer and Technical Evangelist at JetBrains. His passions include software architecture and web development. Book author and frequent contributor to developer publications, Hadi has been speaking at industry events for over a decade. He is based in Spain where he lives with his wife and three sons. He is also an ASP.NET MVP and ASP.NET Insider.

Per Rovegård works as a software consultant at factor10. Per is a passionate developer who believes in having an agile mindset and focusing on simplicity. He is interested in all aspects of software development, but in particular those which have to do with writing good, robust code. He codes Java, Python, C#, JavaScript and more, and while he appreciates good abstractions, he likes to get his hands dirty with raw, technical details. Per blogs at http://programmaticallyspeaking.com.

Developer at Enonic by day, web standards enthusiast by night.

Etter en euforisk opplevelse på noen av de første Scalaprosjektene i Norge ble Alfred kastet tilbake i Javas evigbrennende flammer. Betaler han nå for sine programmeringssynder? Han har uansett personlig erfart hvordan valg av programmeringsspråk kan forandre både tankesett, løsninger og drivkraften til en programmerer.
Etter å ha konkludert med at Scala var for mainstream, valge Erik for tre år siden å lære seg Clojure. Siden den gang har han kjempet en tapende kamp med å evangelisere Lisp i en Java-frelst verden. Frustrasjonen over infiks notasjon og manglende parenteser drev han til slutt til å starte sitt eget selskap hvor han nå får daglig utløp for sin Clojure avhengighet.

Adrian is an active member of cloud interoperability, REST, and DevOps circles. He is the founder of two popular open source projects: jclouds and denominator, both of which are java libraries that help create portable cloud deployments. His current title is "cloud guy" at Netflix, focused on programmatic edge infrastructure.

Viktorâ"the legend of"âKlang, Director of Engineering at Typesafe, is the former Tech Lead for the Akka project. Personal heroes are, including but not limited toâDoug Lea, Walter Sobchak and Daniel Spiewak.

Mads Enevoldsen has worked as a consultant for the last decade mainly on the back-end and architecture of systems. Has particular interest in architecture, REST, and software craftmanship. He has spoken on various conferences on subjects of architecture and REST. Has founded the open source REST framework Forest and the tracing framework Deja Vu.

Stefan Magnus Landrø er manager i Bekk Consulting, og jobber til daglig med ytelsestesting av web-applikasjoner. Stefan er en aktiv bidragsyter i BEKKs javamiljø, og har tidligere holdt foredrag på blant annet JavaZone, Software og Smidig-konferansene.

Thomas er utdannet sivilingeniør i datateknikk fra NTNU og jobber som arkitekt og utvikler i Visma Consulting. Han har 8 års erfaring med javautvikling i store, offentlige prosjekter og er svært interessert i kodekvalitet og testing. Thomas har jobbet både med nyutvikling og med modernisering av gamle legacy applikasjoner der innføring av automatiserte tester har vært kritisk for prosjektenes suksess.

John Fallows is co-founder and CTO of Kaazing, a company recognized for its contribution to the creation of the WebSocket standard. John is actively involved in standard bodies such as AMQP and his sons football team. As his co-founder, he lives by the rule that no task is too big or impossible, it just need to be properly qualified.
Jonas Jacobi is co-founder and CEO of Kaazing, a company recognized for its contribution to the creation of the WebSocket standard. He lives by two rules; 90% of life is showing up, and nothing is impossible (impossible things might just take a bit longer).

Brian Sletten is a liberal arts-educated software engineer with a focus on forward-leaning technologies. His experience has spanned many industries including retail, banking, online games, defense, finance, hospitality and health care. He has a B.S. in Computer Science from the College of William and Mary and lives in Auburn, CA. He focuses on web architecture, resource-oriented computing, social networking, the Semantic Web, data science, 3D graphics, visualization, scalable systems, security consulting and other technologies of the late 20th and early 21st Centuries. He is also a rabid reader, devoted foodie and has excellent taste in music. If pressed, he might tell you about his International Pop Recording career.

Heath Kesler is an open source software evangelist, developer and architect; he has created Java architectures for large scalable, high transaction load systems for such companies as Health Language, LeapFrog Enterprises, Verizon, GE-Energy, Comcast, and IBM. Heath has been a team lead in many project recovery implementations, helping to rescue systems on the verge of collapse. He has been involved with the architecture and implementation of large-scale enterprise systems throughout the world. He conducts trainings on how to use open source frameworks to integrate messaging and services. Heath enjoys pushing the envelop by finding new ways to implement solutions using cutting edge technologies for old and new problems. Heath has spoken at conferences all over the world and was selected as a 2012 JavaOne Rockstar. He enjoys any opportunity to discuss the latest technologies with those who share in his passion. He is an active contributor to several Apache frameworks and a committer on Karaf.

Simen Sommerfeldt, CTO Oslo hos Bouvet ASA og medlem av Østlandsstyret i Dataforeningen. Stiftet Lær Kidsa Koding! for å sørge for at barn kan få en mulighet til å skjønne og kontrollere en stadig mer digital verden.
Direktør internett og nye medier IKT-Norge og leder for Digitutvalget. Ble med tidlig i Lær Kidsa Koding! og koordinerer nå nettverket sammen med Simen

Leif Einar Aune is a software architect and application developer at Comoyo, with broad experience from large, distributed mobile telecommunications networks and multimedia transcoding and distribution. He is the tech lead for Comoyo&apos;s video processing pipeline.
Markus Krüger is a developer at Comoyo, where he is getting paid for having fun with curly bracket languages. He has held several presentations at JavaZone and other venues previously, on various subjects such as performance testing, scheduling, and scalability through streaming. He likes making large things go fast.

Jeg jobber som systemutvikler i konsulentbedriften Itema, Norges beste arbeidsplass. Jeg har vært programmerer i 13 år, og siden 2011 har jeg jobbet på et prosjekt for Sintef MARINTEK, hvor vi lager en tykk-klient for simuleringer av ting i og under vann. Eclipse gjør at produktet vårt er ti ganger bedre enn om vi hadde startet fra null.

Sven Peters is a software geek working as an ambassador for Atlassian. He has been developing Java applications for over 12 years and leading small teams using lean methodologies. Sven likes effective software development and cares about the motivation of developers.

Pål er utdannet sivilingeniør i kommunikasjonsteknologi fra NTNU og jobber som systemutvikler i Iterate AS. Han har jobbet med webutvikling i 10 år, og er alltid på utkikk etter måter å forbedre verktøy og prosesser i og rundt programvareutvikling .

Odin er en kodemaker som liker å fylle verktøykassen. Han elsker å programmere, men blir aldri så glad når utfordringer kan løses med elegante Unixkommandoer.

Having started his career as a Java developer, Simen went on to become co-founder and CEO of Iterate. Some might say that means Simen has joined the dark side - but he refuses to let go of his technical upbringing. His mixed career means that he takes an interest in business issues as well as technology, learning Organizational Analysis one month and Data Analysis with R the next.

Aksel is a developer at Accenture with wide experience creating web applications using Adobe Flex, Java/Spring, and HTML/Javascript. He is very keen on staying up to date on the latest trends and technologies available to create cutting-edge web applications. At Kjernejournal - a large project with ~20 developers, Aksel has the role of frontend architect and developer. He is very focused on choosing the right technical approach when it comes to GUI implementation - to meet not only the demands but also the wishes of the UX/designer-team, making no compromises on usability and speed but still delivering on time and budget.

Thomas Oldervoll has worked 8 years as a Java enterprise consultant for Zenior in Oslo and 5 years as a Software Engineer for Google in Mountain View. Machine learning was something he got into at Google, where he worked on several projects that used machine learning for spam, abuse and fraud detection. Nowadays his tech interests can be summarized as what has been called "the new tech mullet": simple mobile interactions up front, big data in the back.

Christian is a passionate programmer at Kodemaker. He is the author of Test-Driven JavaScript Development, and he maintains several open source projects, including the recently released test-framework Buster.JS and the popular mocking framework Sinon.JS. After dark you may find him tinkering with his Emacs setup, coding Lisp and slowly being devoured by the world of functional programming.
Jeg heter Magnar og er en glad framsieutvikler. Jeg er deleier i Kodemaker, jobber til daglig som konsulent, og om kvelden utvikler jeg blant annet eventyrspillet Adventur Delux, pomodoro-verktøyet mytomatoes.com og en screencast om at emacs rocker. Jeg har også en blogg med screencasts om testdrevet javascript, zombier og mafia på zombietdd.com. Og en til med Clojure og ClojureScript på www.zombieclj.no

Jan Henrik har 15 års erfaring med serverside teknologi på JVMen, både J2EE og lettvektsrammeverk. Han jobber i dag for Knowit som teknisk prosjektleder, arkitekt og utvikler for et større offentlig IT-prosjekt. Jan Henrik er fagleder for DevOps i Knowit og en ivrig lettvekts-fantast som forsøker å jobbe mot smidige arkitekturer og løsninger.

Pål er utdannet sivilingeniør i kommunikasjonsteknologi fra NTNU og jobber som systemutvikler i Iterate AS. Han har jobbet med webutvikling i 11 år, og er alltid på utkikk etter måter å forbedre verktøy og prosesser i og rundt programvareutvikling .

Konrad is a late-night passionate dev living by the motto "Life is Study!", hakking on the Akka toolkit at Typesafe. His favourite discussion topics range from distributed systems to capybaras. He's a very active member of the polish IT community, co-leading or founding multiple technology user groups in Kraków. Over the last years he's been presenting at conferences such as: GeeCON, JavaOne SF, JFokus or Devoxx. In those rare times he's not coding, he spreads the joy of computer science, through helping local user groups and whitepaper reading clubs.

Rustam Mehmandarov holds a master's degree in Computer Science from the University of Oslo. He has been working as a developer and lead programmer for over 8 years. In addition to being passionate about agile development, web development, architecture and geographical information systems, he is also a guru of both Linux and Windows worlds. On his spare time he enjoys working out, as well as coding in Python and Java [but not simultaneously].

Marvin er systemutvikler hos Kantega AS. Han er sivilingeniør i datateknikk med fordypning i intelligente systemer. Han startet som som Java-utvikler i 2007 da han ble med i studentavisa Under Dusken. Hans karriere i Kantega startet i 2009 hvor han jobbet deltid frem til han i 2011 fullførte mastergraden sin og fikk fast ansettelse. Han har jobbet med forvaltning og utvikling av flere store java-applikasjoner, blant annet Kantegas hjemmesnekrede CMS og applikasjoner som bygger på dette.

Kenneth jobber i Miles og har meir enn 12 års erfaring som utvikler, drifter og løsningsarkitekt. Han har jobba i bittesmå prosjekt og i kjempestore prosjekt, og med masse forskjellige programmeringsspråk og teknologiar. Av alt dette har han lært at god smak er viktigare enn "best practice", og at kode ikkje berre skal virke, den skal også vere robust, vedlikeholdbar og lett å forstå.

Senior codemonkey i javaBin.
Senior codemonkey i javaBin.

Fredrik works as a software developer and consultant at Iterate. His main interest currently is functional programming and in particluar how to apply this in his daily job as a Java developer. He's held training courses in Scala and dabbled in Clojure, and likes to speak at conferences.

Johannes Brodwall is a programmer who cares about innovative technologies and effective development practices. He's got 15 years of experience from the IT industry in Norway and Sri Lanka and is currently working as manager of software development for BrandMaster.

Jan Fredrik Wedén jobber i BEKK og har over ti års erfaring som systemutvikler, konsulent og arkitekt. Han har jobbet med systemer i alle størrelsesordner, fra små enbrukersystemer, via små og mellomstore løsninger til moderne webapplikasjoner og komplekse integrasjonsprosjekter og distribuerte systemer. Han kom tidlig inn i prosjekter som benyttet smidige teknikker og har ivret for automatisering av utviklings- og utrullingsprosessen og bruk av relevante metrikker for å forvalte og forbedre kodebasen. Etter en kort periode med gammeldags ASP-utvikling i begynnelsen av sin karriere har Jan Fredrik siden bygget sin kjernekompetanse på Javaplattformen innen enterprise- og webprosjekter. Han var innom EJB den gangen det var skikkelig hot og byttet til lettvektsløsninger og IoC-rammeverk ettersom det overtok tronen som det kuleste man kunne drive med. Prosjekter har vært skrudd sammen fra manuell kompilering via Ant-spaghetti og enkle Maven-prosjekter til automatiserte byggeservere som utfører og måler det meste. Han har jobbet med forretningssystemer og integrasjonsløsninger i bransjer som energihandel, bank/finans, utdanningssektoren og vegtrafikk. På fritiden har han stor interesse for bratt friluftsliv og er gjerne å finne på et fjell med ski under bena, klatrende i en fjellvegg eller syklende der motoriserte kjøretøy sjelden kommer frem.

Java programmerings entusiast og selverklert data nerd, dvs en som gjerne bruker mye av fritiden til programmeringseksperimenter og av ektefelle blir betegnet som kjedelig og asosial.

Martin is a passionate programmer at Kantega AS.

Full-stack utvikler med erfaring fra flere store prosjekter. Han har i en årrekke vært en aktiv bidragsyter til Accentures fagmiljø, og er lidenskapelig opptatt av kodekvalitet, enkelhet, og det å utvikle mot en konsekvent og hensiktsmessig arkitektur.
Forretningsutvikler med lang erfaring fra utvikling av digitale flater i Telenor. Blant annet jobbet med sosiale medier og selvbetjeningsløsninger for både bedrifts- og privatmarkedet. Jobber ut i fra filosofien: «Det handler ikke om hva du lager, men hvordan du lager det».

A programmer who likes to make people stop and think http://kranglefant.tumblr.com

Consultant for over a decade, as a developer or software architect. I also sometimes work as a trainer, a teacher or a book author. But I'm definitely a code geek, though I've more interest in some areas: testing, code quality and GUI are among those that score.

Utvikler med forkjærlighet for mobile flater. De siste årene har jeg jobbet i bank og med hvordan man kan gjøre tjenester lett tilgjengelig for folk uavhengig av hvilken enhet man bruker. Hvis man gir mobil interaksjon litt kjærlighet, så trenger det ikke være så vanskelig å gå gjort alt man trenger å gjøre enten man er på farten eller ligger flat ut på sofaen.

Axel Fontaine is an entrepreneur, public speaker, continuous delivery expert and independent consultant based in Munich. He specializes in Continuous Delivery and hates complexity with a passion. He is the founder and the project lead of Flyway (flywaydb.org), the agile database migration framework for Java. He regularly speaks at technical conferences. He currently works on BoxFuse (boxfuse.com) to radically simplify the deployment of Java apps, by turning them into ultra-compact perfectly isolated secure VMs within seconds and deploying them on any hypervisor with a single command. You can find him online at axelfontaine.com and on Twitter as @axelfontaine.

Kim Christian har jobbet med pantemaskiner og tilhørende server-side systemer i 7 år. Han har vært med på å ta pantemaskinkommunikasjon fra analog dial-up til event-dreven kommunikasjon over TCP/IP og HTTP. Han har jobbet med alt fra å implementere proprietær krypto i pantemaskin kommunikasjonsprotokollen til å tune relasjonsdatabaser og 3-lags web-applikasjoner. Som tech-lead ledet han arbeidet med å ta Tomras nye back-office plattform fra monolitt til et stabilt og skalerbart distribuert system.
Erik brenner for arkitektur og utvikling på Java-plattformen. Han er spesielt interessert i komplekse og kompliserte problemstillinger som f.eks. distribuerte systemer som kommuniserer med hardware-dingser med krav til høy throughput, høy oppetid og lav latency. Erik er aktiv i community-miljøet i Oslo og tror OpenSource og deling av kunnskap er nøkkelen til å bli flink. Han er nestleder i Oslo Software Architecture meetup, medlem i Programkomiteen for JavaZone 2014 og er ellers ofte på Teknologihuset for å høre på eller holde foredrag. Erik er utdannet sivilingeniør data fra NTNU og har jobbet som konsulent siden 2007. Han jobber nå som sjefskonsulent for Altran.

Jeg er en konslulent som jobber i Kodemaker [1]. For tiden sitter jeg hos NSB og lager et system for å håndtere såkalte oppståtte avvik. Tidligere har jeg laget hele to systemer i Clojure (for ekte kunder!). Jeg jobber mest med webapper, både backend og frontend. Jeg skriver om funksjonelle databaser på http://dbs-are-fn.com/, og kan snakke i timesvis om immutability. [1] http://kodemaker.no

Austin is a founding director of Sixty North, a software consulting, training, and application development company. A native of Texas, in 2008 Austin moved to Stavanger, Norway where he helped develop industry-leading oil reservoir modeling software in C++ and Python. Prior to that he worked at National Instruments developing LabVIEW, at Applied Research Labs (Univ. of Texas at Austin) developing sonar systems for the U.S. Navy, and at a number of telecommunications companies. He is an experienced presenter and teacher, having spoken at numerous conferences, software groups, and internal corporate venues. Austin is also an active member of the open source community, contributing regularly to various Python and Emacs projects, and he’s the founder of Stavanger Software Developers, one of the largest and most active social software groups in Stavanger. Austin holds a Master of Science in Computer Engineering from the University of Texas at Austin.

Simon is a Developer Advocate at ZeroTurnaround, and is all about community discussion and interaction. His passion around technical communities led him to become the founder and organiser of the vJUG (virtualJUG), as well as continuing to be an active leader of the London Java Community (LJC). Simon’s energy in building and driving the Java community forward culminated in him becoming a Java Champion in 2014. Previously, Simon worked for IBM for almost 12 years, testing, developing and evangelising WebSphere Application Server. He is an experienced speaker, having presented at JavaOne, DevoxxUK, DevoxxFR, IBM Impact, JDC, JMaghreb and many more (including the vJUG :) ), and is a keen technical writer for RebelLabs.

Harald is a programming, technical architect who enjoys getting lost and finding a way in large, complex systems.

Bengt is part of the HotSpot GC team at Oracle. He has been working with garbage collection in the JVM for the past 8 years. First with the JRockit JVM at BEA and Oracle and since 2010 with HotSpot JVM.

Software Developer. Creator of many things OSS. Passions includes Web Development and Software Architecture. Authored a couple of books, a few courses and has been speaking at industry events for nearly 15 years Currently works as a Technical Evangelist at JetBrains.

Uwe Friedrichsen travels the IT world for many years. As a fellow of codecentric AG he is always in search of innovative ideas and concepts. His current focus areas are resilience, scalability and the IT of (the day after) tomorrow. Often, you can find him on conferences sharing his ideas, or as author of articles, blog posts, tweets and more.

Arkitekt i Scienta AS. Er opptatt av at kundene skal få størst mulig avkastning på IT-investeringene.
Forsker og rådgiver innen kostnadsestimering. Jobber ved Scienta, Simula Research Laboratory og Universitetet i Oslo. Brenner for evidensbasert systemutvikling.

Roland Huss is a senior software architect and head of research and development at ConSol Software, a consulting company focused on Java development and IT services. He has been developing in Java for eighteen years but never forgot his roots as system administrator. Roland is an active open source contributor, lead developer of the JMX-HTTP bridge Jolokia and loves chili pepper.

Dr. Jim Webber is Chief Scientist with Neo Technology the company behind the popular open source graph database Neo4j, where he where he works on R&D for highly scalable graph databases and writes open source software. Jim has written two books on integration and distributed systems: “Developing Enterprise Web Services” on XML Web Services and “REST in Practice” on using the Web for building large-scale systems. His latest book is “Graph Databases” which focuses on the Neo4j database. His blog is located at http://jimwebber.org and he tweets often @jimwebber.

Robert Smallshire is a founding director of Sixty North, a software product and consulting business in Norway . Robert has worked in senior architecture and technical management roles for several software companies providing tools in the energy sector for dealing with the masses of information flowing from today’s digital oil fields. These days he deals with understanding, designing, advocating and implementing effective architectures for sophisticated enterprise and scientific software in Python, C++, C# and F# and Javascript. Robert is a regular speaker at conferences, meetups and corporate software events and can be found speaking about topics as diverse as behavioural microeconomics in software development to implementing web services on 8-bit microcontrollers. He is organiser of the Oslo Python group and holds a Ph.D. in a natural science.

Oleg is a Principal Architect with Hortonworks responsible for architecting scalable BigData solutions using various OpenSource technologies available within and outside the Hadoop ecosystem. Before Hortonworls Oleg was part of the SpringSource/VMWare where he was a core engineer working on Spring Integration framework, leading Spring Integration Scala DSL and contributing to other projects in Spring portfolio. He has 18+ years of experience in software engineering across multiple disciplines including software architecture and design, consulting, business analysis and application development. Oleg has been focusing on professional Java development since 1999. Since 2004 he has been heavily involved in using several open source technologies and platforms across a number of projects around the world and spanning industries such as Teleco, Banking, Law Enforcement, US DOD and others. As a speaker Oleg presented seminars at dozens of conferences worldwide (i.e.SpringOne, JavaOne, Java Zone, Jazoon, Java2Days, Scala Days, Oredev, Uberconf, and others).

Erik Engheim has spent most of his professional career developing software for 3D modeling of oil reservoirs as both Software Engineer and senior Application Architect. The last couple of years he has worked as a Mobile Developer at Knowit. Early middle school, Erik wrote his first lines of code on his Amiga 1000. From then on he was hooked on programming and started developing software professionally in 2000. Erik is interested in all kinds of technology. The most recent fascination is with crypto currencies such as Bitcoin and Ripple.

Jeg har brukt git de siste 5 årene og lærer stadig noe nytt! Jeg er genuint opptatt av å gjøre ting på en effektiv måte, og det formelig klør i fingrene når jeg ser utviklere bruke musa "halve dagen". Jeg ønsker å vise hvor lite som faktisk skal til for å bli mye mer effektiv, uten å bruke musa!

Dr. Shaukat Ali is currently a research scientist in Certus Software Verification and Validation Center, Simula Research Laboratory, Norway. He has been affiliated to Simula Research Lab since 2007. He has been involved in many industrial and research projects related to Model-based Testing (MBT) and Empirical Software Engineering since 2003. He has experience of working in several industries and academic research groups in many countries including UK, Canada, Norway, and Pakistan. Shaukat has been on the program or organisation committees of several international, IEEE and ACM conferences such as ACM/IEEE International Conference on Model Driven Engineering Languages and Systems, European Conference on Modeling Foundations and Applications and System Analysis and Modelling Conference.
Dr. Tao Yue is a senior research scientist at Simula Research Laboratory, Oslo, Norway, where she is leading the expertise area of Model Based Engineering (MBE). She has around 16 years of experience of conducting industry-oriented research with a focus on MBE in various application domains such as Avionics, Maritime and Energy, and Communications in several countries including Canada, Norway, and China. Her main research area is software engineering, with specific interested in requirements engineering, requirements-driven testing, model-based development, model-based configuration and variability modeling, and empirical software engineering. Tao has been on the program and organization committees of many international, IEEE and ACM conferences such as ACM/IEEE International Conference on Model Driven Engineering Languages and Systems (PC member and Track Chair), European Conference on Modeling Foundations, International Conference on Quality Software, and IEEE Annual International Computers, Software&Applications Conference.

Har utviklet Java siden new Date().equals(new Date()) var usant. Erfaring med mye rart siden da, bla. helt andre språk. Jobber for tiden i Scienta, og sitter i JavaZones programkomite, som antagelig er eneste måte å snike slik vranglære ut til massene.

Henrik Wingerei jobber i BEKK hvor han har jobbet som Java-utvikler i 2 år. Henrik er medlem i faggruppen Programmeringsspråk hvor han har jobbet mye med alternative språk og paradigmer. Henrik er overbevist om at man ved å lære seg andre språk, også vil bli bedre i sitt "eget" språk. Henrik har tidligere holdt foredrag på både JavaZone og meetups.

Kari er en entusiastisk utvikler/arkitekt og kursholder med mer enn 10 års erfaring fra softwareutvikling. Hun er fagleder for Java i BEKK Consulting. Hun har planlagt, sendt og mottatt events i en rekke bransjer og formater. Hun er nysgjerrig på hvor konsepter kommer fra og hvordan ord former software.

Sirar Salih is a senior software engineer working at Itera Norway. He is VP at the Norwegian .NET User Group (NNUG) and board member of the Oslo chapter. He is also board member of the AngularJS Oslo user group. Sirar loves holding presentations and has experience from speaking at international conferences such as the Norwegian Developers Conference and HTML5 Developer Conference. He also actively writes blog posts at his .NET/JavaScript blog; http://sirars.com/.

Manager og fagleder i Bekk Consulting. Med på å drive javaBin i Trondheim. Har en M.Sc. i softwareutvikling fra ITU i hjembyen København. Mikkel er en utadvent og engasjert utvikler som elsker JVM'en og det rike utvalget av språk og biblioteker i Java-verdenen. Han har bred erfaring fra utvikling av skybaserte løsninger og rike webapplikasjoner. Mikkel liker seg godt i Trondheim og den norske natur. På fritiden er han gjerne å finne på enten ski, terrengsykkel, eller fjellturer, og har sannsynligvis mer ski- og fjellutstyr enn den gjennomsnittlige nordmannen.

Allard Buijze is software architect at Trifork, which delivers software development, consultancy and training services to both national and international organizations. As an architect, he is responsible for the technical choices in his projects and investigates technologies for their potential in the diversity of projects Trifork does. For the last decade, he has been developing and designing enterprise applications for both large-scale and smaller projects. His focus has always been on clean application design, maintainability and performance. The training of co-developers is a very important part thereof. Allard has given several trainings in the areas of scalable architectures, test driven development, application design and clean coding. He strongly believes that good craftsmanship can only be achieved through continuous and intensive exchange of experience with others. He is also a regular speaker on meetups and conferences, such as J-Fall, Jazoon, QCon and Goto. The last years, he has been investigating and applying CQRS to a number of projects. As a result, he created the Axon Framework, an open source Java framework that helps developers create scalable and extensible applications by providing the building blocks that CQRS based infrastructures typically require. Axon has a growing community and has already been successfully introduced in several high-profile projects around the world.

Ken Sipe is a passionate 18 year veteran of enterprise software development leadership and founder of Code Mentor, Inc, a St. Louis consultancy. Ken is an author and award winning international speaker on the practices of software architecture and engineering, continuous delivery practices and agile processes. His current topics of research are centered around software quality and the future of cloud technologies.

Bjørn er utdannet ved Universitetet i Bergen og har siden 2002 vært ansatt i Ambita. Han jobber for tiden som teknisk ekspert med fagansvar for Java og REST, men liker å utforske funksjonell programmering, Scala og Groovy på fritiden. Har siden juni 2013 vært med i ledelsen i javaBin Bergen.
Utdannet ved Høgskolen i Bergen. Har drevet med software-utvikling siden 1996 og java-løsninger siden 2002. Jobber for tiden som konsulent fra eget firma. Har de siste årene leflet med Scala, men håper java 8 skal gi litt av den samme boosten der man er bundet til java som språk. Har vært med på driften av javaBin Bergen siden starten i 2004.

Arne har jobbet med arkitektur, design og implementasjon av integrasjonsløsninger i 17 år. Erfaring fra disse årene inkluderer: Dedikerte mellomvareløsninger. Store egenutviklede applikasjoner med mange integrasjonspunkter. Dyre, kommersielle mellomvareplattformer. Open Source integrasjonsplattformer. Rene Java integrasjonsløsninger. Han har holdt korte og lange kurs for selskaper som har hatt behov for å øke sin integrasjonskompetanse. Opplæringen har inkludert alle aspekter ved integrasjonsløsninger, med deltakere fra alle deler av organisasjonen. Arne er Cand.Scient. i informatikk fra Universitetet i Oslo, og jobber som sjefskonsulent i Embriq Consulting, der han er faggruppeleder for integrasjon og tjenestebasert arkitektur (SOA).

Lars Bak is a software engineer at Google, co-designer of the Dart programming language, and he has spent the last 28 years implementing object-oriented programming languages. Some of the projects from his past: Beta, Self, Strongtalk, Hotspot, Monty, OOVM, V8, and Dart.

An Apache Cassandra committer and PMC member, Gary Dusbabek is a life-long programmer specializing in distributed systems. His past experience includes working with large-scale text and image indexes in the newspaper industry and high-volume advertisement booking software. Recent work at Rackspace includes working on Cassandra full-time and being a founding member of the Cloud Monitoring team. Gary currently works on the Cloud Metrics team that created the open source Blueflood metrics engine and tinkers with distributed indexes in his spare time. Past speaking engagements include Cassandra Summit 2010+2011, SXSW 2012, O'Reilly Strata (NYC+Santa Clara) 2012, Cassandra EU 2012+2013, Berlin Buzzwords 2013, and Data Day Texas 2014.

Har jobbet med Devops og Java i BEKK, og spesielt på prosjekt hos Bring. Elsker å kunne prodsette flere ganger om dagen, og automatiserer så mye som mulig.
Utvikler med DevOps-tendenser. Tror veien til himmelen ligger i konfigurasjon som kode og hyppige prodsettinger.

Christian Kreutzfeldt is a solution developer and architect at the Otto Group Business Intelligence department. His passions include large-scale event stream processing, distributed software design and e-commerce.

David Pilato is Technical Advocate at Elasticsearch and the creator of the Elasticsearch French Speakers User Group. He is a a frequent speaker about all things Elasticsearch, including previous editions of Devoxx (Belgium 2013 plus France 2012 & 2013). In his free time, he enjoys coding and DJs four times per year, just for fun. He lives with his family in Cergy, France.

27 år gammel mann fra Sandnes, mastergrad i bioinformatikk fra Universitetet i Oslo. Har jobbet med medisinsk informatikk på Radiumhospitalet, og er nå konsulent i Knowit. Brenner for funksjonell programmering og begripelig kode.

Sigmund har jobbet som konsulent i Knowit siden januar 2007, og før det et par år i forskningssektoren. Siden august 2011 har han vært teamleder for Knowit’s største Scala-prosjekt. I tillegg til å være en lidenskapelig Scala-fanboy, setter Sigmund også pris på andre teknologier som gjør systemutvikling enkelt og greit. Han avskyr unødvendig kompliserte løsninger. Ved siden av konsulentrollen jobber Sigmund som pardansinstruktør på kveldstid, og bruker alt for mye tid på spill og øl.

Trond Marius works as Principal Consultant and CTO at Mesan. He is on a constant lookout for ways to simplify everyday life as a developer. Trond Marius has a broad experience using a wide array of the possibilities provided by the JVM, using Java, Scala and Clojure.

Kevlin is an independent consultant, trainer and writer based in the UK. His development interests are in patterns, programming, practice and process. He has been a columnist for various magazines and web sites and is co-author of A Pattern Language for Distributed Computing and On Patterns and Pattern Languages, two volumes in the Pattern-Oriented Software Architecture series. He is also editor of the 97 Things Every Programmer Should Know site and book.

Jeg er en Java-utvikler/arkitekt med 13 års erfaring fra ulike prosjekter og bransjer. Jeg brenner for et godt håndtverk, gode løsninger som gir verdi til sluttbruker, og er ofte å finne på en av de mange gode Meetupene her i Oslo. Har holdt flere lyntaler tidligere på både JavaZone og Smidig med fokus på god kode, teknisk gjeld, applikasjonsarkitektur m.m. Til daglig jobber jeg som seniorkonsulent hos WebStep.

I'm a developer, architect, JS evangelist, and intrapreneur at Accenture Norway. I have a passion for building smart web applications that puts the user first, leveraging the latest innovations in web technology. I have worked on many agile projects in both the public and private sectors, small to very large, with lots of great engineers. I strive to keep up with the technology landscape, with a special focus on frontend tools & frameworks. I regularly speak at conferences and hold workshops, both internally and externally. http://blog.akselgresvig.com/

Rustam Mehmandarov holds a master's degree in Computer Science from the University of Oslo. He has been working as a developer and lead programmer for over 8 years. In addition to being passionate about agile development, web development, architecture and geographical information systems, he is also a guru of both Linux and Windows worlds. On his spare time he enjoys working out, as well as coding in Python and Java [but not simultaneously].
Michael Gfeller wrote one of his first computer programs on a Casio FX-602P and has been fascinated by programming ever since. He has been programming whenever possible, sometimes even to create works for the sole purpose of pleasing the eye. After studying chemistry and earning a D.Sc. from ETH Zürich, he has been working full time with IT since 1999. Java entered his world in 2006. He loves learning new and old stuff, theory in practice, theory for theory's sake, art, and books. He works as developer, architect and tech lead, and is lead of the Java technical network at Computas. He is quite convinced that semantic web technologies are one of the best ways to deal with the challenges of handling distributed data. For the past one and a half years he has been working on a semantic project, unfortunately not yet based on the new semantic web technologies.

Svetlana is working on Project Kotlin (http://kotlin.jetbrains.org) at JetBrains since 2011. From time to time she tries to encourage people with Kotlin at conferences. Before joining Kotlin she had a passion for the Scala programming language. She loves concepts and ideas, and skiing in the Alps as well.

Johannes Brodwall is a programmer who cares about innovative technologies and effective development practices. He's got 15 years of experience from the IT industry in Norway and Sri Lanka and is currently working as manager of software development for BrandMaster.

Kittel er seniorkonsulent i Capgemini. Han har 5 års erfaring med utvikling av webapplikasjoner. For tiden jobber han mest med Javascript. Han er opptatt av å utfordre etablerte sannheter og finne nye måter å se på Javascript på.

Stein Inge is Practice Lead for Continuous Delivery and Devops at BEKK. He is a true Agile evangelist with 15 years of experience in both contributing to, and helping others to become better at producing excellent software together with demanding customers. He is also an experienced speaker at conferences and the founder of DevOps Norway Meetup.

Eivind er fagsjef for Java i BEKK. Han mener at programmering ikke er et håndverk man blir ferdig i utlært i - og oppdager stadig nye måter å lage enklere og ryddigere løsninger. Eivind er interessert i nye og gamle programmeringsspråk og paradigmer. Han bruker gjerne kvelden på å prøve ut ting han ikke rakk i løpet av dagen. Eivind har holdt presentasjoner på mange tidligere JavaZone konferanser - dette blir det 3. året på rad hvor han snakker om erfaringer knyttet til modernisering av datasystemer hos Skatteetaten.

Svein-Magnus is a Norwegian web technology specialist experienced in web systems architecture and agile systems development from working as a consultant with several leading consulting houses and enterprises in Norway, where his main focus has been on the use of innovative web solutions, user experience and information architecture. In addition Svein-Magnus have founded and are the community organizer for Oslo Open Data Forum and he is also an experienced speaker from a range of technology conferences.

Dr. Fabian Stäber is a senior software architect at ConSol* Consulting & Solutions Software GmbH. He works as a developer and consultant, and has been developing Java Web applications for about 10 years. Fabian is excited about JEE, clustered back-ends, Big Data applications, and advanced distributed architectures. His academic research was on decentralized, peer-to-peer-based network architectures in industrial applications. Fabian is an active member of the Java community, gives talks at developer conferences, and writes publications for developer magazines.

Arun Gupta is Director of Developer Advocacy at Red Hat and focuses on JBoss Middleware. As a founding member of the Java EE team at Sun Microsystems, he spread the love for technology all around the world. At Oracle, he led a cross-functional team to drive the global launch of the Java EE 7 platform through strategy, planning, and execution of content, marketing campaigns, and program. After authoring ~1400 blogs at blogs.oracle.com/arungupta on different Java technologies, he continues to promote Red Hat technologies and products at blog.arungupta.me. Arun has extensive speaking experience in ~40 countries on myriad topics and is a JavaOne Rockstar. An author of a best-selling book, an avid runner, a globe trotter, a Java Champion, JUG leader, he is easily accessible at @arungupta.

Software Engineer at appear.in, basically getting paid to have fun. The resident AngularJS geek of the team. Loves cake, and could talk for hours if given the chance.

Fredrik har over 15 års erfaring med softwareutvikling hvorav 10 med søk. Han var med og starte opp aksjehandelstjenesten Stocknet, jobbet i FAST med implementering hos kunder, og har tilsammen jobbet med søk i FINN i 6 år. Fredrik brenner for å se nye måter å bruke søketeknologi på, og synes at noe av det mest spennende har vært nettopp å lage denne løsningen for prospektive søk i FINN. Når han ikke jobber med søk liker han å fotografere og bygge (og fly/kondemnere) quadcopters.

Andreas Hegna is senior security advisor at Deloitte with extensive experience in the penetration testing field. He is a speaker, course instructor and trusted advisor for industry leading companies that have an absolute focus on information security and he has given a number of talks at conferences related to this field. Andreas is part of Cyber Risk Services at Deloitte Norway where he focuses on secure development of web-applications and information security strategies as well as web-application testing, network infrastructure testing and mobile application testing.

Filip van Laenen is a Chief Engineer at the Norwegian software company Computas AS, which supplies IT solutions to the public and the private sector in Norway. He has more than fifteen years of experience in the software industry, from being a developer in both small and large teams to being the lead developer and competency leader for security and software engineering for the whole company.

Markus Krüger is a tech lead at Telenor Digital (previously known as Comoyo). After twelve years of working on traditional server setups, he switched to cloud computing in late 2011 and hasn't looked back since. He has held several presentations at JavaZone and other venues previously, on various subjects such as performance testing, scheduling, and scaling systems. He likes making large things go fast.

Dr. Jim Webber is Chief Scientist with Neo Technology the company behind the popular open source graph database Neo4j, where he where he works on R&D for highly scalable graph databases and writes open source software. Jim has written two books on integration and distributed systems: “Developing Enterprise Web Services” on XML Web Services and “REST in Practice” on using the Web for building large-scale systems. His latest book is “Graph Databases” which focuses on the Neo4j database. His blog is located at http://jimwebber.org and he tweets often @jimwebber.
Ian is a software engineer at Neo Technology, the company behind Neo4j, the world’s leading open source graph database. He's also a co-author of REST in Practice (O’Reilly) and a contributor to the book REST: From Research to Practice (Springer) and Service Design Patterns (Addison-Wesley). I present at conferences worldwide on graph data, and the awesome graph capabilities of Neo4j, and recently wrote the book Graph Databases (O'Reilly) about my experiences with Neo4j.

Peter is Head of Real-Time Solutions at Kaazing, a software company enhancing the way business and customers communicate across the Web using the new HTML5 WebSocket standard. Peter works closely with architects and the developer community to build and deploy the best possible web communication solutions. Before joining Kaazing, in various product management leadership roles Peter was responsible for Oracle's portal product strategy. Peter is a frequent speaker at conferences and industry events, including GoTo, YOW!, JavaOne, Oracle OpenWorld, HTML5DeConf DevCon5, AppsWorld, QCon, South by Southwest and various user group meetings. He is the co-author of two books: The Definitive Guide to HTML5 WebSocket and the Oracle WebCenter 11g Handbook.

I am a software developer with a strong focus on craftsmanship principles and simplicity. Coming from java after many years I traveled through the ruby lands to now enter the java world with groovy again. I love clean code, TDD and lifetime learning. I live with my family in Lübeck, Germany.

Henri Muurimaa, MSc. has been a professional developer and team leader since 1997. Over the years he has used many Java technologies and tools in a plethora of projects ranging from a few days to dozens of man-years. Lately he has been exploring how to leverage the functional and reactive approaches to build desktop-like web applications with Scala and Java. He is the author of RxVaadin and a contributor to the Scaladin project. He has been a member of the Vaadin team since 2002, currently serving as the SVP of Engineering. Henri has presented in Devoxx, and JUG and Scala interest group meetings throughout Europe.

Joachim Lous har 18 års erfaring som forsker og utvikler, spredt på en rekke språk og plattformer, men det meste av tiden med Java som hovedspråk. De siste 5 årene har han jobbet for Steria, på noen av landets største smidig-prosjekter. Brenner blant annet for brukervennlighet og clean code, som han anser som to sider av samme sak.

Neal Ford is Director, Software Architect, and Meme Wrangler at ThoughtWorks, a global IT consultancy with an exclusive focus on end-to-end software development and delivery. He is also the designer and developer of applications, magazine articles, video/DVD presentations, and author and/or editor of eight books spanning a variety of subjects and technologies, including the most recent Presentation Patterns. He focuses on designing and building of large-scale enterprise applications. He is also an internationally acclaimed speaker, speaking at over 300 developer conferences worldwide, delivering more than 2000 presentations. Check out his web site at nealford.com. He welcomes feedback and can be reached at nford@thoughtworks.com.

Hans Olav har en spesialisering innen algoritmer og grafikk og har jobbet i over syv år med utvikling av applikasjoner brukt til modellering og tolkning av oljereservoar. I 2012 tok han steget over i en ny tilværelse som fulltids mobilutvikler. Fokus på ny teknologi og engasjerende brukeropplevelse var viktige motivasjonsfaktorer. Stor stas den gangen, stor stas fremdeles.
Anders er en frafallen matematiker som har jobbet med systemutvikling som konsulent i 10 år, nå som seniorkonsulent i Knowit. Han har kodet mye på backend, men jobber gjerne i hele stacken og er for tiden interessert i mobilteknologi.

Programmer at FINN.no, Norway's largest classifieds website, working on core platform systems. Keen on all things open sourced. Cassandra MVP and an Apache Tiles PMC.

Passionate programmer who likes using technology to do quirky stuff to make everyday a little easier and a little more… weird.

Kent Beck is Chief Scientist at Iterate. He is best known for software patterns, test-driven development, Extreme Programming, and JUnit.

Java Champion Michael Hüttermann is freelancing delivery engineer and expert for Continuous Delivery, DevOps and SCM/ALM. He has written a couple of books including the first book on DevOps called "DevOps for Developers" (Apress, 2012). Michael is frequently speaking at leading international conferences, including JavaOne San Francisco, JavaOne Shanghai, Devoxx, Jfokus, DevOpsDays Amsterdam, DevOpsDays Berlin, and many more, as well as JUG gatherings worldwide.

From deep into the Nice mountains, Stéphane works for Red Hat on the Ceylon project. Passionate hacker in Java, C, Perl or Scheme. A web standards and database enthusiast, he implemented among other things a WYSIWYG XML editor, a multi-threading library in C, a mobile-agent language in Scheme (compiler and virtual machines), and some Web 2.0 RESTful services and rich web interfaces with JavaScript and HTML 5. Eager to share, he is a frequent speaker at various conferences such as the Scheme Workshop 2004, Nice University in 2008-2009, many Java User Groups as well as the Riviera Java User Group he founded with Nicolas Leroux. A long-time open-source user and advocate, he is committer on RESTEasy, author of jax-doclets, stamps.js and various Play! Framework modules, and developer on various Ceylon projects for Red Hat.

I'm Agile Coach and Eclipse/Java Consultant for a leading provider of Embedded and Realtime solutions after working as Build Manager at Maersk and as Agile Coach, Principal Consultant and Distinct Architect for a Financial Services company. Helping Global 500 Enterprises across industries like Mobile/Telco, Web/Social, Finance, Travel/Logistics, Automotive, Healthcare & Public Services, as well as IT vendors like Oracle, HP or IBM. Using a wide range of technologies like Java (ME-EE), Oracle, IBM, Microsoft, Adobe, JavaScript, Scala, Python or other dynamic languages. Besides working for major companies, I help several Open Source projects like Agorava.org, Apache DeviceMap,..., run my own agency Creative Arts & Technologies, write song lyrics, novels, screenplays, books and articles. I am Committer at Apache and Eclipse, Babel Language Champion, UOMo Project Lead and active member of the Java Community Process, in JSRs like 321 (Trusted Java), 333 (JCR), 342 (Java EE 7), 344 (JSF 2.2), 346 (CDI 1.1), 350 (Java State), 354 (Money), 358/364 (JCP.next), 360/361 (ME Embedded), 362 (Portlet 3), 363 (Unit-API, also Co-Spec Lead) and I'm the only Individual Member of the Executive Committee.

Salve J. Nilsen works for The Norwegian Open Source Competence Center (“Friprogsenteret”), an independent competence center for open source and free software funded by the Norwegian government. The speaker has more than 15 years of involvement with Open Source projects and communities behind him. Most of those years have been used helping the Perl 5 and Perl 6 communities with code, infrastructure, bug reports, praise, patches, social events, hackathons, presentations, blogging, conference organizing and marketing; All this while having regular jobs. :) You can follow Salve on Twitter at @sjoshuan, and if you want to talk with him about software culture, board gaming or tasty brews, he'll be happy to do so! :-D

Morten Weel Johnsen is a software engineer who has a passion for development and continues improvement of processes to get more time developing. He works as a developer for Iterate and have worked with android, frontend and backend projects. He have migrated from Ant, Make and Maven to Gradle. Besides being a developer, Morten loves going to concerts, biking and to travel as often as possible.

After completing his PhD at Imperial College, Nat Pryce joined a dot-com just in time to ride the bust. Since then he has worked as a programmer, architect, trainer, and consultant in a variety of industries, including sports reportage, marketing communications, retail, telecoms, and finance. He has also worked on academic research projects and does occasional university teaching. An early adopter of XP, he has written or contributed to several open source libraries and tools that support TDD and was one of the founding organizers of the London XP Day conference. He also regularly presents at international conferences. Nat is based in London, UK.
Steve Freeman, author of Growing Object Oriented Software, Guided by Tests (Addison-Wesley), was a pioneer of Agile software development in the UK. He has developed software for a range of institutions, from small vendors to multinational investment banks. Steve trains and consults for software teams around the world. Previously, he has worked in research labs and software houses, earned a PhD (Cambridge), written shrink-wrap applications for IBM, and taught at University College London. Steve is a presenter and organiser at international industry conferences, and was chair of the first London XpDay.

Gareth is a consultant at Bouvet, currently working as a "technical architect" on the Erex project. He has been involved with Erex since shortly after moving to Norway and joining Bouvet in 2011. He believes Erex is a fascinating solution which has served its purpose well, yet still contains opportunities for future expansion and development.
Ragnar is a consultant at Bouvet, currently working as a developer in the Erex team. He joined the Erex team in February 2013, and has enjoyed it ever since. Other things he enjoys, is to take really long exposures of galaxies far, far away, to take shorter exposures of the world around him, and to expose himself to the world under the motto “to baldly go where nobody else wants to go!”

Kristoffer Dyrkorn er Scientist i BEKK med lang erfaring fra store Java-baserte webløsninger. Ved siden av å være søkemotor-nerd er han spesialist på løsningsarkitektur, integrasjon og ytelsestuning. Han har en mørk fortid som 3D-programmerer, aller først i Pascal og 80286 assembly, og senere i OpenGL og C på Silicon Graphics maskiner. I moderne tid har han laget 3D-visualiseringer i WebGL av åpne data fra Statens Kartverk.

Mark is a veteran of arranging community events, with experience from the DND and various Meetup groups. In his day job Mark works as a Manager in Bouvet, where he has responsibility for competancy development in the areas of Java and Solution Architecture. Like Stephen Segal’s character in “Under Siege”, he also cooks.

Espen Dalløkken, 37 years old from Oslo, Norway. Works as a web developer at FINN.no. Has been doing web development since the late 90ies. Currently working hard towards making NodeJs take over the world (or at least take over FINN). Is one of the organizer of the Web Rebels Conference.

Senior utvikler i Kantega. Alltid ute etter nye, enklere eller bedre måter å gjøre ting.

Utvikler i JPro. Jobbet med integrasjon og utvikling de siste ti årene.

Developer and security guy at BEKK trying to make it easier to write secure apps and websites. Former speaker at JavaZone, NDC and OWASP AppSec EU.

Arild graduated with a masters degree in Computer Science from University of Tromsø. His education specializes in distributed systems, and his thesis, which explores visualization of cluster load, received best master thesis award for his faculty at the graduation year. Arild works as a consultant at Bekk Consulting. His interests include concurrency and search engines. He also has an interest in Scala, and regularly attends Scalabin meetups. At his current project as a consultant, Arlld participates in building infrastructure for large scale, real-time collection of traffic data. The main tools used for this project are Akka and Elasticsearch. Through this project, and personal side projects, Arild has gained hands-on and deep knowledge of Akka and the actor model.
Øyvind is Practice Lead for Scala & JVM at Bekk Consulting. He has a Master of Science degree in Computer Science from the Norwegian University of Science and Technology, building on a Bachelor degree in Engineering in Computer Science from Gjøvik University College. His interests include programming languages, especially Scala, functional programming and technology in general.

Sven Anders Robbestad is a mobile web programmer who's worked on web projects since the mid 90s. His favorite technologies are Javascript, Node and AngularJS. He is employed at Inmeta Consulting AS in Oslo as a senior consultant.

Dagfinn Bergsager er gruppeleder for webutvikling på sentral IT på UiO (USIT). Han er utdannet ved IFI på UiO og har lenge jobbet med løsninger for datainnsamling til forskning på UiO.

Tom is a real geek! He has a vast experience in messaging systems, business process management and high-throughput processing. For the last few years he has been working on numerous assignments fulfilling a range of roles, particularly dealing with design and development of small to large scale systems, mostly on the JVM. Tom is an enthusiastic open source contributor and the founder of a couple of open-source projects (www.reficio.org). Finally, he is very keen on tutoring, presenting and live coding, especially in a non-fluffy way. Tom has previously presented at various events in Europe including Devoxx, Jazoon, GeeCON, jDays, SoftShake or 33degree. You can reach him on twitter at @tombujok

Håkon T Sønderland is a systems consultant for Antares Gruppen AS. He has developed software professionally since 1986. The last 10 years mostly in Java, for the web. He has destroyed performance in applications and created catastrophes in code long enough to appreciate the ability to test performance easily.

I am the founder and CEO of Data Geekery GmbH, located in Zurich, Switzerland. With my company I have been selling database products and services around Java and SQL since 2013. Ever since my Master's studies at EPFL in 2006, I have been fascinated by the interaction of Java and SQL. Most of this experience I have obtained in the Swiss E-Banking field through various variants (JDBC, Hibernate, mostly with Oracle). I am happy to share this knowledge at various conferences, JUGs, in-house presentations and on my blog.

Alexander Schwartz is Principal IT Consultant at msg systems. He’s been in Web development for more than 15 years and in Java development for more than 10 years. He has been a developer, scrum master, team leader, architect, and project manager in various projects. He enjoys productive working environments, agile projects and automated tests.

Morten jobber som konsulent i Miles og er fagansvarlig for arkitektur. Han har lang erfaring som arkitekt fra en rekke store selskaper og er opptatt av å se løsninger og prosesser i sin helhet. For Morten er det viktig at teknologi og løsninger skal komme av et forretningsmessig behov. Forvaltning av løsninger har en spesiell plass i Mortens hjerte!

Ragnvald har jobbet med programvareutvikling i 15 år, de siste 8 i Tandberg og Cisco med videokonferanseprodukter. Han behersker mange språk, deriblant Java, C, C++, Python Objective-C og portugisisk. Han gløder opp hvis du snakker om vannski, paragliding, algoritmer, toppturer, wakeboard, kiting, snowboard eller været.

Utvikler og arkitekt med 25 års erfaring, de siste 14 hovedsakelig innenfor Java. Konsulent i Bouvet. Forsker på slekta i den mørke halvdelen av året, og leter gjerne geocacher i den andre.

Smidig entusiast med lang konsulenterfaring.

Jeff Genender is a Java Champion, Apache Member, and Java Open Source consultant specializing in SOA and enterprise service implementation. Jeff has over 25 years of software architecture, team lead, and development experience in multiple industries. He is a frequent speaker at such events as JavaOne, JavaZone, Java In Action, JFokus, and numerous Java User Groups on topics pertaining to Enterprise Service Bus (ESBs), Service Oriented Architectures (SOA), and application servers. Jeff is an active committer and Project Management Committee (PMC) member for Apache ServiceMix, CXF, Geronimo, a comitter on OpenEJB and Mina, and author of several very popular Maven plugins. He is the author of Enterprise Java Servlets (Addison Wesley Longman, 2001), co ? author of Professional Apache Geronimo (2006, Wiley), and co-author of Professional Apache Tomcat (2007, Wiley). Jeff also serves as a member of the Java Community Process (JCP) expert group for JSR-342 (Java Platform, Enterprise Edition 7 (Java EE 7) Specification) as a representative of the Apache Software Foundation. Jeff is an open source evangelist and has successfully brought open source development efforts, initiatives, and success stories into a number of Global 2000 companies, saving these organizations millions in licensing costs.

Consultant for over a decade, as a developer or software architect. I also sometimes work as a trainer, a teacher or a book author. But I'm definitely a code geek, though I've more interest in some areas: testing, code quality and GUI are among those that score.

Developer, interested in eventsourcing and reactive applications with focus on DDD.
Developer

CTO i Bouvet Oslo, mangeårig programmerer, stifter av bevegelsen "Lær Kidsa Koding!" og medlem av Østlandsstyret i Dataforeningen. Jeg er varamedlem i instituttrådet for informatikk ved HIOA

Jostein har jobbet med Javautvikling i 10 år og har en genuin interesse for Java, sikkerhet og personvern. Etter at det ble kjent i hvilken skala overvåkningen i dag skjer på nettet er det mange som har stilt seg selv spørsmålet om hva man selv kan gjøre. Jostein har bestemt seg for å spre kunnskap om hvordan sikkerhet og personvern henger sammen, og hvordan dette kan utnyttes til å få bedre personvern på nettet. Til daglig jobber han som Senior Software Engineer hos Steria.

Mads Hoel is a senior consultant working at Inmeta Consulting. He has worked on a lot of different projects, technologies and languages and clients since he started working in 2008. Mads is passionate about code craftsmanship, which is what he enjoys most about coding. He is really curious about new technology, alternative languages and practices. The past year or so he has embraced on the more recent trend to use more Java and less frameworks.

Nathaniel T. Schutta is a software architect focussed on mobile and making usable applications. A proponent of polyglot programming, Nate has written two books on Ajax and speaks regularly at various worldwide conferences, No Fluff Just Stuff symposia, universities, and Java user groups. In addition to his day job, Nate is an adjunct professor at the University of Minnesota where he teaches students to embrace dynamic languages. In an effort to rid the world of bad presentations, Nate coauthored the book Presentation Patterns with Neal Ford and Matthew McCullough.

Masoud has been working on software development projects since 1998, which gives him a broad perspective on software development in general and changes in the software development landscape in the past 1/5 decades. Masoud has experience with variety of technologies (.NET, J2EE, CORBA, and COM+) on diverse platforms (Solaris, Linux, and Windows). He has a master degree in information systems with a bachelor degree in software engineering. Masoud has authored fair number of articles and other types of publications including several articles at Java.net and Dzone. He is author of multiple refcards, published by Dzone, including but not limited to Using XML in Java, Security and GlassFish v3 refcardz. Masoud is one of the founding members of NetBeans Dream Team and a GlassFish community spotlighted developer. Masoud is author of GlassFish Security book published in 2010 covering GlassFish v3 security and Java EE 6 security. He recently co-authored another book Developing RESTful Services with JAX-RS 2.0, WebSockets, and JSON.

Rafael is a software engineer at Kantega, specialized on the Java platform. He has a particular interest in concurrency, functional programing and byte code engineering. Rafael contributes to various open source projects and is a blogger featured on several aggregation networks. He regularly shares his knowledge on conferences. When coding outside of his workplace, Rafael is working on Byte Buddy, a library for run time code generation.

Ismar er teknisk arkitekt i Accenture. Han er ansvarlig for interne hackathons og entreprenørskap i tillegg til å være ansvarlig for teknisk arkitektur på en av Norges mest spennende frontend prosjekt hos Telenor.
Anna er interaksjonsdesigner og frontendutvikler i Accenture og jobber til daglig i Accenture's innovasjonslab på Blindern. Anna har øye for detaljer og tenker alltid på brukerens behov først.

Odin er en Kodemaker og sivilingeniør i datateknikk som liker å fylle verktøykassen. Etter å ha jobbet med Clojure er han nå overbevist om at funksjonell programmering ofte kan lede til mer robuste løsninger på en raskere måte.

Tom Gilb is an American systems engineer, consultant, and author, known for the development of software metric, software inspection, and evolutionary processes. He coaches managers and product owners, writes papers, develops the courses. There are very many organizations and individuals who use some or all of their methods. IBM and HP were two early corporate adopters. Recently over 15,000 (and growing) engineers at Intel have adopted the “Planguage” requirements methods. Ericsson, Nokia and recently Nordea and Statoil and A Major Multinational Finance Group use parts of their methods extensively. Many smaller companies also use the methods.
Kai Gilb Kai Gilb has partnered with Tom in developing these ideas, holding courses and practicing them with clients since 1992. He coaches managers and product owners, writes papers, develops the courses, and is writing his own book, ‘Evo – Evolutionary Project Management & Product Development.’ Tom & Kai work well as a team, they approach the art of teaching their common methods somewhat differently.

I am a front end developer and Javascript expert, 37 years old, currently employed at Accenture Norway. I write code at work, in my spare time and in my sleep. I am a proud member of the minority who actually love Javascript, and used Ajax long before anyone thought to call it that. At some point in the murky past, I picked up a degree ("sivilingeniør") from NTNU in Trondheim, and went on to write online game applications for Norsk Tipping starting 2001. While at Norsk Tipping, I created the framework known as Canvas Library (for lack of an actual name). I find the Canvas Library to be very interesting indeed, and every demonstration I have given thus far has led me to believe that a lot of other people would be similarly interested in it as well.

Audun har jobbet som utvikler og arkitekt i nesten 10 år. Han liker store kompliserte systemer, diskusjoner, og ting som google lager.
Per Jørgen har jobbet som utvikler siden dot.com-bølgen på slutten av 90-tallet og finner fortsatt motivasjon og indre glede i en test som lyser grønt.

Trond en engasjert løsningsarkitekt og systemutvikler ansatt i Steria, med erfaring fra bank/finans, luftfart og offentlig forvaltning. Han har jobbet som konsulent, grunder, og som leder av avdelinger i forskjellige firma. Med sin brede bakgrunn trives han best i krysningspunktet mellom forretning og teknologi. Medarbeidere beskriver Trond som energisk, løsningsorientert og som et naturlig samlingspunkt med stor autoritet. Trond er en kjent profil i smidigmiljøet i Oslo og har holdt mange foredrag, og vært med å dra i gang mange initiativ, som Smidig 2008 og XP meetup.

Hardy Ferentschik is Senior Developer at JBoss and member of the Hibernate development team. He is the project lead of Hibernate Validator, core developer for Hibernate ORM and Search and Bean Validation expert group member. Hardy is a frequent speaker at JUGs and leading software development conferences.

Anne Landro har jobbet med programmering i mange år. Den siste tiden har hun hatt mest fokus på det funksjonelle aspektet av systemutvikling. Hun liker godt å prøve forskjellige roller, og trives best når hun kan få en god forståelse av helheten og behovene bak et system.

Eivind er fagsjef for Java i BEKK. Han mener at programmering ikke er et håndverk man blir ferdig i utlært i - og oppdager stadig nye måter å lage enklere og ryddigere løsninger. Eivind er interessert i nye og gamle programmeringsspråk og paradigmer. Han bruker gjerne kvelden på å prøve ut ting han ikke rakk i løpet av dagen. Eivind har holdt presentasjoner på mange tidligere JavaZone konferanser - dette blir det 3. året på rad hvor han snakker om erfaringer knyttet til modernisering av datasystemer hos Skatteetaten.

Ian works on research and development for future versions of the Neo4j graph database. Harbouring a long-held interest in connected data, he has for many years been one of the foremost proponents of REST architectures. His recent work with Neo4j has led him to extend the application of his ideas, from the Web's global graph to the realm of graph databases. He is a coauthor of 'Graph Databases' and 'REST in Practice' (O'Reilly), and a contributor to 'REST: From Research to Practice' (Springer) and 'Service Design Patterns' (Addison-Wesley). He blogs at http://iansrobinson.com, and tweets at @iansrobinson.

Nils Christian nyter å hjelpe team å levere software som gleder både brukere og sponsorer. Som konsulent er han å finne i ulike roller hvor han får praktisert dette gjennom coaching i smidig test- og utviklingsmetodikk, kravspesifisering, systemarkitektur og utvikling. Nils Christian er sivilingeniør fra NTNU og ansatt i Scienta.
Trond er utvikler og arkitekt med flere års erfaring fra å jobbe med monolittiske JEE systemer og kjenner godt utfordringene med disse. Jobber nå som konsulent for Scienta og har som fokus å hjelpe bedrifter med å bygge modulariserte systemer, ofte med hjelp av domene-drevet design (DDD) og hendelsedrevet tjenesteorientering (EDA + SOA).

Owen is project lead for the Hafslund Link project. He's been an avid fan of Scala and Akka for 5 years and has been using them professionally for most of that time. Tell, don't ask.

Jobber i Capgemini Norge AS, har jobbet som Salesforce utvikler siden 2011
Jobber i Capgemini Norge AS, har jobbet som Salesforce utvikler siden 2011

Bert is a Fellow at Luminis in the Netherlands. Besides his day job he is a Java User Group leader for NLJUG, the Dutch Java User Group (~4000 members). A frequent speaker on Java and Software Architecture related topics all over the world, as well as a book author and member of the editorial advisory board for Dutch software development magazine: Java Magazine. In 2008, Bert was honored by being awarded the coveted title of Java Champion by an international panel of Java leaders and luminaries. Bert is a JavaOne 2012 Rock Star Speaker and a 2013 Duke's Choice Award winner.

Åshild jobber i Capgemini som Java-utvikler. Hun har mer enn tre års erfaring med systemutvikling. Hun synes applikasjonssikkerhet er interessant, og liker å finne enkle løsninger på å forbedre dette i programutvikling.
Mikael jobber i Capgemini som Java-utvikler. Han har mer enn fire års erfaring med systemutvikling, og leder sikkerhetsgruppen i Capgemini Oslo. Han er er opptatt av sikkerhet, ikke bare i software, men også om hvordan bedrifter bør tenke rundt sikkerhet generelt.

Trond Arve Wasskog er utvikler, arkitekt og CTO i Bekk Consulting. Han har jobbet med utvikling på Java-plattformen i hele sin karrière, og er nå løsningsarkitekt for MAG og EDAG
Anders Sveen er utvikler og arkitekt hos Miles i Oslo. Han har i det siste jobbet såpass mye med Bash og Linux at han har begynt å kalle seg for drifter. I utformingen av systemer er smidig system-utvikling viktig, og han forsøker å balansere effektivitet og hastighet med forutsigbarhet og stabilitet i produksjon. Han har erfaring fra små, store, bra og dårlige smidige prosjekter, men lærer stadig nye ting. Gjennom erfaringen med drift og ansvar i produksjon har han erfart hvor viktig det er å få hele verdikjeden til å spille sammen, ikke bare utvikle kjapt. Det finnes få ting som er så gøy som å legge ut noe i produksjon én dag, måle den neste, og legge ut en korreksjon den tredje dagen.

Javakonsulent og fagmanager for .js hos Visma Consulting som fordriver dagene med å lage REST-grensesnitt og Backbone-applikasjoner hos Skatteetaten. Lidenskapelig opptatt av JavaScript, men sørgelig klar over at man noen ganger må gå med på kompromiss og kaste ut npm, bower og grunt.

Shai is a 20 year industry vendor and former Sun Microsystem engineer, co-founder of the LWUIT project and member of the original WTK team. Shai has worked with all major operators and manufactures world wide and has partnered with Chen Fishbein to form the open source Codename One project. Shai is a Java One Rock star and top rated JavaZone speaker.

Rafael is a software engineer at Kantega, specialized on the Java platform. He has a particular interest in concurrency, functional programing and byte code engineering. Rafael contributes to various open source projects and is a blogger featured on several aggregation networks. He regularly shares his knowledge on conferences. When coding outside of his workplace, Rafael is working on Byte Buddy, a library for run time code generation.

Andres is a Java/Groovy developer and a Java Champion with more than 14 years of experience in software design and development. He has been involved in web and desktop application development since the early days of Java. He is a true believer in open source and has participated on popular projects like Groovy, Griffon, and DbUnit, as well as starting his own projects (Json-lib, EZMorph, GraphicsBuilder, JideBuilder). Founding member of the Griffon framework. Andres maintains a blog at http://jroller.com/aalmiray

Cliff Click is the CTO and Co-Founder of 0xdata, a firm dedicated to creating a new way to think about web-scale real-time analytics. He worked on the HotSpot Server Compiler (the Sea of Nodes IR), and helped make Java fast the notion of JIT'ing mainstream. He helped Azul Systems build an 864 core pure-Java mainframe that keeps GC pauses on 500Gb heaps to under 10ms, and worked on all aspects of that JVM. Cliff's been building compilers for over 35 years, holds a dozen patents, and speaks at industry conferences on a regular basis.

My name is Marty Cochrane, I was born and raised in Ireland where I started my software career at a large Coal fired Power Station writing ladder logic for PLC's that controlled various parts of the power station. I moved on after university to become a Java Developer working with enterprise Java applications for a top fortune 500 company. I moved to Norway 2 years ago where I started working as a developer in Statkraft, developing business critical applications used everyday to bid Statkraft's power on to the various Nordic electricity markets. Outside of work I spend most of my time working on and racing motorbikes. I love what I do in work and I love what I do outside of work so I try to join these together as much as possible. Normally this means I spend most of my time out in my garage giving myself electric shocks and creating blue smoke as I realise I have wired something completely wrong. Sometimes though I actually get a result from the hundreds of hours spent working on these things and I love sharing what I discovered with others.

Stian Grenborgen jobber som sjefsutvikler/arkitekt i Steria. Han er for tiden hos Landbruksdirektoratet. Gjennom arbeid her, og gjennom bakgrunn som systemarkitekt i BBS/Nets, har han gode kunnskaper omkring utviklerdesignede testløsninger. Stian har holdt en rekke foredrag, blant annet på JavaZone og hos UiO.
Anders jobber i Steria som løsningsarkitekt og utvikler. Han har mer enn ti års erfaring som systemutvikler. Han brenner for å lage enkle løsninger til komplekse problemer, og er alltid på utkikk etter verktøy til å hjelpe han med dette. Anders har tidligere holdt foredrag på blandt annet Javazone og Smidig konferansen.

Jon-Thomas er en arkitekt og seniorutvikler med 15 års erfaring fra konsulentbransjen og fra produktutviklingsfirma i Australia. Han har siden endt utdannelse opparbeidet seg bred erfaring innen design og utvikling av ytelseskritiske applikasjoner på Microsoft og Oracle sine plattformer. Jon-Thomas har allsidig prosjekterfaring: Alt fra teamleder og utviklerroller i prosjekt med over 120 deltakere; via totalansvar for arkitektur, utvikling og kundekontakt i enmannsprosjekt; til arkitekt og seniorutvikler i større prosjekt hvor han har fulgt applikasjonen gjennom hele livssyklusen. Han er en dyktig, entusiastisk og pålitelig medarbeider og teammedlem. Som arkitekt og utvikler er Jon-Thomas opptatt av høy kvalitet i alle leveranser, og benytter kjente metoder og patterns i arbeidet. Han er opptatt av å være oppdatert på teknologi og metodikk, samarbeider godt, og jobber aktivt for å få ut det beste av alle rundt seg.

Konrad Beiske is a developer at Found, where i participates in managing hundreds of Elasticsearch clusters. He wrote his masterthesis on query optimization in a peer to peer database and has since spoken at Javazone regarding peer to peer technology.

Java old-timer, grunnlegger av Subsonic, partner i Scienta.

Trygve Laugstøl jobber gründer og webutvikler i fiken.no.

Brian Sletten is a liberal arts-educated software engineer with a focus on forward-leaning technologies. His experience has spanned many industries including retail, banking, online games, defense, finance, hospitality and health care. He has a B.S. in Computer Science from the College of William and Mary and lives in Auburn, CA. He focuses on web architecture, resource-oriented computing, social networking, the Semantic Web, data science, scalable systems, security consulting and other technologies of the late 20th and early 21st Centuries. He is also a rabid reader, devoted foodie and has excellent taste in music. If pressed, he might tell you about his International Pop Recording career. One of SemanticWeb.com's "Top 100 Semantic Web People".

Jobber som rådgiver i Acando hvor jeg bistår store offentlige etater med å operasjonalisere IT-strategi gjennom virksomhetsarkitektur og systemarkitektur. Har de siste årene jobbet spisset med sikkerhet, hvor jeg har spesifisert sikkerhetsarkitektur og implementert sikkerhetsmekanismer som SAML, TLS og PKI.

Programmerer av natur, konsulent av profesjon. Ble introdusert til Java i 1999 og har stort sett blitt sittende fast i det siden. Har flere vekttall i matematikk enn de fleste, og mottatt lønn hovedsaklig for å programmere siden 2002. Liker å se på meg selv som en problemløser, enten problemet består i dårlig kode, feil kode, eller krav som er umulig å innfri innenfor andre gitte rammebetingelser. Har en forkjærlighet for å rive ned ting som ikke funker, for så å bygge det opp igjen, fremfor å lappe på det. Mener at litt mer matematisk bevissthet blant oss ville forbedret både kode og løsninger.

Bendik jobber til daglig som utvikler i BEKK, hvor han jobber med alt fra backend til frontend. Han kommer opprinnelig fra Java-verden, men har i det siste vandret mer og mer inn i den funksjonelle verden. Han er også interessert i programmering som håndverk, og opptatt av pen og lesbar kode.

Seb Rose is an independent software developer, trainer and consultant based in the UK. He specialises in working with teams adopting and refining their agile practices, with a particular focus on automated testing. He first worked as a programmer in 1980 writing applications for estate agents and solicitors in compiled BASIC on an Apple II. He has worked with many mainstream technologies since then, for many well-known companies, such as Amazon, IBM, NCR, HBOS, Standard Life and Aegon. He is a regular conference speaker, contributor to O'Reilly's "97 Things Every Programmer Should Know" and co-author of the Pragmatic Programmer's "The Cucumber-JVM Book."

Rikard Thulin is a senior Java Evangelist with 17 years of experience using Java. He is the president of the Swedish Java User Group as well as JUG leader for the Gothenburg chapter. Rikard is a frequent speaker at conferences such as JavaOne, Jfokus, JavaZone, Øredev. Entrepreneur and co-founder of the innovative firm Squeed.

Johannes Brodwall is a programmer who cares about innovative technologies and effective development practices. He's got 15 years of experience from the IT industry in Norway and Sri Lanka and is currently working as manager of software development for BrandMaster.

Sam Newman is a technologist at ThoughtWorks, where he currently splits his time between encouraging and sharing Innovation globally and helping design and build their internal systems. He has worked with a variety of companies in multiple domains around the world, often with one foot in the developer world, and another in the IT operations space. If you asked him what he does, he’d say ‘I work with people to build better software systems’. He has written articles, presented at conferences, and sporadically commits to open source projects. He is currently writing a book on building Microservices, which should be available in the Autumn of this year from O'Reilly.

Martin Skarsaune is a passionate programmer working for Kantega.

Joakim Blomskøld jobber som utvikler. Han har mer enn 10 års erfaring med Java og webutvikling.
Aleksander har lenge jobbet med backendsystemer i Nets, men jobber nå som gründer og web utvikler i Fiken (https://fiken.no).
Trygve Laugstøl jobber gründer og webutvikler i fiken.no.

Alf Kristian has 10 years of experience programming on the JVM, primarily Java. The last 6 years he has sought better solutions and languages, since he thinks Java the language, and its numerous frameworks, simply is not good enough. He is a believer in functional programming, and hence has a deep interest in Scala and Clojure. His commitment to FP on the JVM, has lead him to give many talks, workshops, and organize several user groups meetups for FP. He is currently co-founder and organizer of Oslo Socially Functional Programmers, which aims to to promote the use of FP in Oslo. Alf Kristian works as a programmer and consultant for Kodemaker, and is currently very happy programming Clojure at work.

Brian McCallister joined Groupon as CTO of Platform in 2013. Prior to Groupon, he was Principal Architect and Distinguished Engineer at Ning, where he was responsible for directing and communicating the technical big picture across the organization. He joined Ning originally as a Core Architect when it was a tiny startup and watched it grow to over two hundred people. At the Apache Software Foundation, Brian has served on the Board of Directors and as PMC Chairs for the DB and ActiveMQ projects. Within the ASF he has focused on pushing for greater project autonomy, and mentoring and shepherding a number of projects into the foundation, including Cassandra, Mesos, and Jclouds. In his broader past, Brian has worked variously as a programmer, engineering manager, technical writer, and systems administrator on projects ranging from internet platforms to loom control drivers. He is also a great mentor, and takes a vested interest in developing other engineers to help turn them into great engineers. Brian holds an MS in Education and BA in English both from Bucknell University.

Har jobbet som Java-utvikler for Knowit Objectnet i 5 år. Nesten hele denne tiden har blitt brukt på Oslo kommunes forvaltningsprosjekt, et java-prosjekt med mye xml integrasjoner. Før dette forsket jeg på ekspertestimering hos Simula Research Laboratory, hvor mye av tiden ble brukt til å undersøke på hvordan man gjør vurderinger og bedømmelser rent kognitivt ifm. usikkerhetsangivelser.

Henrik jobber som konsulent i Bouvet, og er en faglig engasjert utvikler og arkitekt med fokus på Java, open source og smidig utvikling. Han liker å holde seg oppdatert på teknologi og trender, og har i det siste interessert seg spesielt for tjenesteorientering og verktøy/metoder for å kunne understøtte kontinuerlige leveranser (DevOps). Henrik er opptatt av automatisering og kontinuerlig forbedring, og foretrekker å bruke enkle teknologier og produkter. Han er interessert i arkitektur og liker å ha oversikt, samtidig som han alltid er opptatt av implementasjonsdetaljer.

Yilmaz Guleryuz* is an adventurer from Antioch/Turkey, currently living in Norway. He is still hands-on coder/explorer, with experience in forming distributed teams ground-up till performing stage, and delivering software services and platforms. Developing, adapting, and expanding Agile practices by nurturing Yogurt culture, and constituting Lean & Gamification techniques into gemba. He blogs, sometimes speaker of events, and writes books to evangelise better workplace culture blended with experiences and experimentations. Living, working, and breathing with entrepreneurial lifestyle! His playground is @WareNinja

I used to procrastinate by playing games. Now I procrastinate gaming by dabbling in game-making. I'd like to think I learned something while pushing pixels to the screen and watching them move. I like moving pixels. They are pretty.

Vegard jobber til daglig på prosjekter for BEKK. Her har han som regel ansvar for å lage, utrede og vurdere større arkitekturer eller gi råd til kunder om IT-strategi og teknologi. Arkitektur, kvalitet, forretningsforståelse, helhetlig tenkning og samspill er alle områder som Vegard er spesielt interessert i, og deler gjerne sin interesse for disse områdene.

Arkitekt med interesse for mer enn det som foregår i Java-koden.

Frontendutvikler hos BEKK Consulting som jobber til daglig med utvikling og forvaltning av store javascriptapplikasjoner. Bakgrunn fra sivilingeniørstudiet i Kommunikasjonsteknologi ved NTNU. Lidenskapelig opptatt av JavaScript og webteknologi. I ledig tid bedrives det i stor grad strengbehandling i ymse former: gitartraktering, squashspilling og diverse programmeringsprosjekter.

Sigurd er Java-utvikler i Steria, med lidenskap for ny teknologi. Og han har jobbet med nye frontend-rammeverk som Angular.js og Knockout. For tiden jobber Sigurd som en innleid utvikler i Husbanken, der han jobber som frontend-utvikler for nytt søknadsskjema. Han har fulgt utviklingen av Web Components fra utsiden det siste året, og laget noen komponenter selv.

Odin er en Kodemaker og sivilingeniør i datateknikk som liker å fylle verktøykassen. Etter mange år med objektorientering, design patterns og mutasjoner er han nå overbevist om at fremtiden er immutable.

Henrik jobber som konsulent i Bouvet, og er en faglig engasjert utvikler og arkitekt med fokus på Java, open source og smidig utvikling. Henrik er fagleder for kontinuerlige leveranser og DevOps i Bouvet. Han synes det er rart at ikke flere kunder krever kontinuerlige leveranser, og mener dette bør være en naturlig praksis for alle smidige team!

Arun Gupta is Director of Developer Advocacy at Red Hat and focuses on JBoss Middleware. As a founding member of the Java EE team at Sun Microsystems, he spread the love for technology all around the world. At Oracle, he led a cross-functional team to drive the global launch of the Java EE 7 platform through strategy, planning, and execution of content, marketing campaigns, and program. He is a prolific blogger since 2005 and have authored 1500+ blogs on technology. Arun has extensive speaking experience in ~40 countries on myriad topics and is a JavaOne Rockstar. He also founded the Devoxx4Kids chapter in the USA and continues to promoting technology education amongst kids. An author of a best-selling book, an avid runner, a globe trotter, a Java Champion, JUG leader, he is easily accessible at @arungupta.

Seniorutvikler i FINN.no. Hovedsakelig backend-utvikler med java som hovedspråk, men leker litt i alle lag. Ble engasjert i universell utforming i 2014, og har vært med å starte en grasrotgruppe av designere og utviklere i FINN.no som jobber med å spre kunnskap om universell utforming i FINN. Opprinnelig sivilingeniør i kommunikasjonsteknologi fra NTNU, og har jobbet på et EU-prosjekt om fremtidens mobile tjenester før FINN fra 2008.

Software Engineer i Sopra Steria. Bidrar til en rekke open source prosjekter på fritiden. Brenner for kodekvalitet og testbarhet. Alltid lyst til å lære mer om bibliotekene, verktøyene eller økosystemet rundt prosjektene jeg jobber med.

Kristoffer Dyrkorn er Scientist i BEKK med lang erfaring fra store Java-baserte webløsninger, både som utvikler, teamleder og løsningsarkitekt. Ved siden av å være grafikknerd og NoSQL-nerd er han spesialist på løsningsarkitektur, integrasjon og ytelsesoptimalisering.

Kari er en entusiastisk utvikler/arkitekt. I vinterhelgene er hun ofte å finne enten på vei opp eller ned en fjellside.

Tim is a teacher, author, and technology leader with DataStax, where he serves as the Director of Training. He can frequently be found at speaking at conferences in the United States and all over the world. He is the co-presenter of various O’Reilly training videos on topics ranging from Git to Mac OS X Productivity Tips to Apache Cassandra, and is the author of Gradle Beyond the Basics. He tweets as @tlberglund, blogs very occasionally at http://timberglund.com, and lives in Littleton, CO, USA with the wife of his youth and their youngest child.

Rabea studied computer science and got a diploma in 2008. She is co-leading the software development department and is working as a software engineer on various projects at MEKO-S. Her main focus is on keeping the code base clean and educating the team on how to write better code. Rabea is a well known speaker at conferences and user groups around the world. She started the Java user group Bremen in 2012 and is part of the organisation team ever since. Besides software development she likes to watch football games in the local Weserstadium.

Erlend Flaten er utdannet Sivilingeniør i datateknikk fra NTNU. Til daglig jobber han som konsulent hos Acando. Han har jobbet som utvikler siden 2005. Det vil si ganske mange metodikker og pattern som har kommet og gått. Mye av tiden går til vedlikehold og videreutvikling av applikasjoner. Dette gir et godt innblikk i hvordan pattern holder seg over tid og kanskje blir teknisk gjeld etterhvert. Erlend jobber sammen andre konsulenter fra Acando for å skape en kultur og jobbe effektivt med å håndtere teknisk gjeld.

Adrian's an active member of many open source and cloud communities. He participates in the httpbis working group and develops http/2 related functionality, most notably okhttp. Adrian is a a member of the Spring Cloud OSS team at Pivotal.

Jobber til daglig som manager i Bekk Consulting der jeg for det meste jobber som utvikler i Java prosjekter. Jobber for tiden som teamleder og syns dette er et veldig spennende felt. Bruker mye tid til å finne ut hvordan jeg best mulig kan støtte teamet mitt og legge til rette for at de kan jobbe best mulig, og samtidig sørge for at alle trives.

I'm a developer, architect, and researcher at Schibsted Products and Technology. I was Head of product development at Sesam, which builds a data integration platform. I was a consultant for many years, switching between the roles of enterprise architect and hardcore developer. I built an open source project called Duke, which is an engine that finds near-duplicate database records. Used to work with Topic Maps, was Product manager for a Topic Maps software company, edited several of the relevant ISO standards, and invented and implemented the query language tolog.

Magnus Bae is a software engineer at Itera Norway. He is an utter car bore, but loves everything that's engineered. Programming-wise he has worked with everything from race cars (actual) to Dynamics CRM, but his main competency is still Java. No one escapes JavaScript, and what better to do with JS than to run it in the JVM - right?

Abdel is a software engineer and technology enthusiast at heart and by profession. Particularly interested in distributed systems and scalable architectures. Experienced in Java Enterprise Applications and a wide range of related technologies. Founder of a number of organizations namely The NorCal Java User Group, The Silicon Valley Dart Meetup, and The Silicon Valley Spring User Group. Abdel is a JavaOne RockStar and a frequent speaker at a number of developer conferences including JavaOne, JAX Conf, OsCon, OREDEV, 33rd Degree, Devoxx, NFJS, UberConf, and many user groups and community events.

Audun har jobbet som utvikler og arkitekt i 10 år. Han liker store kompliserte systemer, diskusjoner, og ting som google lager.
Henning Spjelkavik har i det siste jobbet med både arkitektur, ytelse og skalering på FINN.no, i tillegg til å vedlikeholde én av Norges ledende karttjenester. Hans favorittverktøy er wireshark, bash og en liten leatherman.

Håvard overlevde Linux sin overgang til UTF-8 i 2002. Etterpå ble han utvikler i Kantega der han ofte brukte et annet OS en resten av teamet, så han fikk alltid skylda når tegnene ble feil. Han er også gammel nok til å vite hva en "code page" er.

Joachim Van der Auwera is a software consultant with a strong focus on building quality software which is secure and maintainable. He has been using Java for more than 10 years, mostly for enterprise projects. In this period he was involved in both architecture and development of enterprise applications. He has experience using, contributing and leading open source projects. He has a focus on making applications enterprise-level, on usability and maintainability (especially at API level) and security. Some of his mantras include consistency (APIs and user interfaces), repeatability (builds and tests) and user-friendliness (especially exception!). Speaker's qualifications Devoxx 2014 quickie: Simple run-time profiling Devoxx 2013 quickie on jTransfo MapWindow Conference 2012: Introducing the Geomajas Open Source framework for building spatial web applications MapWindow Conference 2012: Ktunaxa RMS, open source GIS for a first nation BeJUG 2012: Geomajas introduction Jax London 2011 : Mapping, GIS and geolocating data in Java Jazoon 2011 : Mapping, GIS and geolocating data in Java Devoxx 2010 : Introduction to the Geomajas web mapping framework Devoxx 2010 : iText in action section on use of iText in Geomajas Devoxx 2010 birds-of-a-feather : "Geomajas web mapping users meeting" Foss4G 2010 : Evolution of GIS data

I am a developer at BEKK Consulting with a passion for clean, concise, and sound code. I have about 8 years of experience from Java projects, and still get a childish joy when seeing tests go from red to green. I believe TDD is not dead and still has an important role in software development. Currently during the day I am developing Digipost together with a bunch of awesome people at Posten and colleagues from BEKK. At night I am playing keys with some crazy guys in BEKK Band. I have an unhealthy affection for vintage synthesizers.

Per Otto er fagansvarlig for Java og integrasjon i Eika og har jobbet med utvikling på Java-plattformen i over 15 år. I Eika jobber Per Otto i prosjekter og møter hele tiden utfordringer sammen med teamet for å finne løsninger og gode navn på moduler.

Álvaro is a passionate software architect and agile enthusiast with over 14 years of experience. He started his career in 2001 coding in Perl and Java, but then quickly focused on Java EE, working for companies like IBM BCS, BEA Systems or Sun Microsystems. He created his own company in 2005, Salenda, and since 2007 he specialised on Groovy/Grails, introducing them in Spain by founding Escuela de Groovy, the very first Grails company in Spain. Now he works in 4finance as Application Architect. He is a speaker at conferences like Greach, Codemotion Madrid and Rome, GGX London or GR8Conf Copenhagen (http://lanyrd.com/profile/alvaro_sanchez/). He also has wrote several Grails plugins, including Spring Security REST, which provides stateless, RESTful, token based authentication for Grails using OAuth 2 and JWT (http://github.com/alvarosanchez).

Kjetil er en teknisk arkitekt i Accenture hvor han i det siste har sett en på trender innen app-utvikling, som Internet of Things og cloud-løsninger, og hva dette krever av bedrifter som ønsker å henge med i tiden. Har et brennende ønske om å gjøre ting så enkelt som mulig.

Programmerer, systemutvikler og teknisk arkitekt.

Sigmund Hansen recently started working for Computas. He has set up the ELK stack for log processing and is responsible for builds and deployments in one of the larger projects at Computas. At the time of this writing he is working on automating deployment of the system to enable continuous delivery and deployment in the future. Prior to working at Computas, Sigmund worked and studied at the Department of Informatics at the University of Oslo. He held classes in Data Structures and Algorithms, Semantic Technology and Object-Oriented Programming, and various presentations in subjects like game development, Arduino prototyping and Linux shell usage.

Seniorkonsulent hos Mesan, med erfaring fra bl.a. forvaltning. Har drevet en del med feilsøking og graving i logger, og har (smertelig) fått erfare forskjellen mellom god og dårlig logging når man feilsøker. Trives best i backend, og interesser inkluderer kodekvalitet og lesbarhet, samt det å gjøre jobben enklest mulig for de som skal drifte og videreutvikle det jeg lager.

Tidlig i tennårene utviklet jeg en genuin interesse for programmering, Linux, kaffe og åpen kildekode generelt. Nå femten-ish år senere har jeg noe mindre hår på hodet (udefinert som damen på passkontoret valgte å si det når hun noterte hårfargen), men fortsatt den samme interessen. Nylig hadde jeg gleden av å konvertere det siste team medlemmet fra Windows til Linux for utvikling. For tiden jobber jeg for Acando AS og i et fantastisk hyggelig samarbeid med Helsedirektoratet og Pasientreiser ANS med å frigjøre en søknadsprosess fra konvolutter og frimerker ved å tilby en elektronisk løsning som om man skal være ærlig mange forventer i 2015.

I have been a Java developer for 8 years, involved in various projects with client in the private sectors or the government. I aspire to the values of the software craftsmanship. I recently read the book mentioned in the abstract and got really inspired. I think the issue presented there should not be ignored, it should be integrated in the software craftsmanship paradigm. Honestly, I am not sure I am the right person to present solutions, but I do feel I need to raise awareness of this issue from a developer perspective.

Viktor Klang is the Deputy CTO at Typesafe—prolific contributor to the Akka project as well as member of the Reactive Streams SIG when not involved in the Scala Standard Library concurrency APIs. Interested in all things distributed and concurrent—software as hardware.

John is co-founder and CTO of C24, a London based software company created in 2000, C24 was sold to NASDAQ company Iona Technologies in 2007 and re-acquired back in 2011. C24 has the vast majorities of the world’s largest investment banks as customers, specialising in complex messaging and integration, standards like SWIFT, ISO-20022, FpML and FIX as well as the bank’s own internal formats. C24 has recently release a new product that creates binary versions of these messages reducing memory and network usage by over 20 times while significantly increasing performance at the same time. In the past John has been global chief architect at JP Morgan, BNP Paribas and was the original architect behind Visa’s V.me (now Visa Checkout). John has co-authored several Java books and is a frequent speaker at technical and banking conferences around the world. He is married to a French wife and has 3 boys (11, 13 & 16) who all love travelling (as long as there’s internet).

Seniorkonsulent i Miles, med interesse for Java, Agile, IoT, BigData og kunstig intelligens.

Developer at Bekk Consulting for five years. Has organized many courses and workshops both in Android and iOS. Loves to teach, play metal music and buy mobile phones.
Developer at Bekk Consulting for three years, and Practice Lead for mobile technologies. Has an above average interest in mobile technologies, wearables and Liverpool FC.

I work for TCS and currently as a consultant at Nets Norway AS in the capacity of a developer/architect for frontend applications. I have 7 years of experience developing java applications. I am passionate about programming and exploring new technologies and learning new domains. Ah yes, if not at my desk hacking away at the keyboard, you can probably find me enjoying my 10th cuppa joe in a quiet corner of the office.
I work daily as team manager overseeing offshore work for invoice solutions at Nets Norway AS. My work experience is now 15 years of developing and designing java applications with a focus on agile developoment, clean and maintanable code.

Simon Ritter manages the Java Technology Evangelist team at Oracle Corporation. Simon has been in the IT business since 1984 and holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Physics from Brunel University in the U.K. Originally working in the area of UNIX development for AT&T UNIX System Labs and then Novell, Simon moved to Sun in 1996. At this time, he started working with Java technology and has spent time working both in Java development and consultancy. Having moved to Oracle as part of the Sun acquisition he now focuses on the core Java platform, Java for client applications and embedded Java. He also continues to develop demonstrations that push the boundaries of Java for applications like gestural interfaces, embedded robot controllers and in-car systems. Follow him on Twitter, @speakjava, and his blog at blogs.oracle.com/speakjava.

Developer and creator of many things OSS, his passions includes Web Development and Software Architecture. Has authored a couple of books, a few courses and has been speaking at industry events for nearly 15 years. Currently at JetBrains leading the Developer Advocacy team. Spends as much time as he can writing code.

Utvikler med 15 års erfaring med java. Fattet tidlig interessen for FP, men har slitt med å få det til å passe i en java verden. Har 5 års erfaring med bruk av FP i java i ekte prosjekter.

Coming soon...

Klara is a senior developer in the Java Mission Control team at Oracle, coding GUIs and hacking the build system. She has been working with Java/JRockit Mission Control and the JRockit JVM since 2002. If you ask Java Mission Control related questions on the Oracle forums or on StackOverflow, chances are Klara will give you an answer. You can also get hold of her on twitter to get the crochet pattern for the JDuchess mascot.

Einar has been designing software and programming computers for many years and still thinks it's marvelous that you can get paid to do so. He writes code in admiration and respect of the djinns of the computer and writes obscure technological blog posts whenever he learns something interesting. Part computer scientist, part software engineer and consultant, he thinks that we should focus on ideas, concepts and understanding rather than fads and superstitions.

Anders er en frafallen matematiker som har jobbet med systemutvikling i over 10 år, nå som seniorkonsulent i Knowit. Han har til nå ikke vært noen typisk devops-utvikler, så hvis han kan få grep på Docker kan helt sikkert du det også!

Jobber som rådgiver i Acando hvor jeg bistår store offentlige etater og private bedrifter med å operasjonalisere IT-strategi gjennom virksomhetsarkitektur og systemarkitektur. Har de siste årene jobbet spisset med sikkerhet, hvor jeg har spesifisert sikkerhetsarkitektur og implementert sikkerhetsmekanismer som SAML, TLS og PKI.

Anders jobber til daglig som løsningsarkitekt og utvikler i SopraSteria. Han brenner for å lage enkle løsninger til komplekse problemer.

Alexandra discovered the Usenet in 1994 and has been lost ever since. She started toying with web sites when browsers were called Lynx, and she contributed to KDE. In the middle of it all, she spent 10 years living big drama on opera stages. She currently works as Lead Interaction Designer for Iterate AS. And she still has a lot she wants to learn.

Martin is a passionate programmer focusing on core Java and JVM languages.

I'm a developer at Hazelcast. I wrote my first line of code when I was 7 years old. Since than I was always interested in "How this system works under the hood?" I like pushing systems towards limits, brushing my skills by exploring HotSpot source code, contributing to open source projects and arguing about development over a pint of beer.
Christoph Engelbert is Technical Evangelist at Hazelcast. He is a passionated Java developer with a deep commitment for Open Source software. He mostly is interested in Performance Optimizations and understanding the internals of the JVM and the Garbage Collector. He loves to bring software to it's limits by looking into profilers and finding problems inside of the codebase.

Technical enthusiast, software engineer and product owner of backbone tools developed in Allegro. He is open to all new technologies and programming languages and he has no fear to work on legacy systems and rewrite it in modern way.

Stian Thorgersen is a principal software engineer at Red Hat and the project lead on Keycloak, an open source identity and access management solution by Red Hat JBoss Middleware. Prior to joining Red Hat, Stian was the lead developer at Arjuna Technologies working on Agility, a cloud federation platform. Stian has over 15 years experience with Java and has focused on cloud solutions for nearly a decade.

Mark is a coding enthusiast and manager at Bouvet. Over the last 15 years he has worked with exotic and little known technologies such as PROIV, evolutionary dead ends like PowerBuilder, and the widely used behemoth that is Java. After some years in the wilderness Mark has recently rediscovered the joy of coding. He now spends his evenings experimenting with JavaScript, Robotics and the Internet of Things, much to the chagrin (and occasional delight) of his wife and two children. He also helps arrange various events for the developer community in his adopted hometown of Oslo, Norway.

Gunnar Wagenknecht is Director of Engineering at Tasktop where he is responsible for Engineering Services, Operations and Engineering Effectiveness. Before Tasktop he was CTO at AGETO and lead the development and operation of a multi-tenant, worldwide e-commerce platform serving millions of transactions each day. He also is a prolific contributor with many years of experience in the Eclipse Open Source Community where he has recently been awarded with the Lifetime Contribution Award. Apart from software and computers he loves chatting about fishing, diving and other things that matters over a good beer or a glass of wine.

Most Java and JVM answers on StackOverflow.com Peter's blog "Vanilla Java" has had 3 million views. Founder of the Performance Java User's Group (1300+ members) Lead developer of OpenHFT open source libraries for low latency applications in Java.

Utdannet fra UiO, master informatikk. Har tre år fartstid som Java-utvikler fra Nets Norway AS og jobber nå på Conax Norway AS. Har holdt undervisning/forelesninger som gruppelærer på UiO (INF1060, INF2270, INF[34]151). På in-house utviklerdager har jeg holdt to foredrag på Nets. Deltaker på JavaZone de siste årene. Jeg liker godt å holde presentasjoner, og håper å få muligheten på JavaZone.

Keep It Simple Stupid - there are enough people making things complicated

Lead developer for recommendations/anbefalinger i FINN.no. Har jobbet i FINN.no i 9 år og jobbet tidligere med en av de internasjonale satsningene til og FINN.no og var i en periode Søkearkitekt. Er aktiv i javaBin og arrangeringen av JavaZone .

A passionate tester/test manager who likes to get developers and testers to work together - we are all aiming to launch the best product ever!

Trond Arve har vært løsningsarkitekt for MAG- og EDAG-prosjektene i Skatteetaten. Han er CTO i Bekk Consulting, og har et brennende engasjement for å forbedre leveranseevnen i vår industri, spesielt i offentlig sektor.

Erik brenner for arkitektur og utvikling på Java-plattformen. Han er spesielt interessert i komplekse og kompliserte problemstillinger som f.eks. distribuerte systemer som kommuniserer med hardware-dingser. Erik er aktiv i community-miljøet i Oslo og tror OpenSource og deling av kunnskap er nøkkelen til å bli flink. Han er nestleder i Oslo Software Architecture meetup, medlem i Programkomiteen for JavaZone og er ellers ofte på Teknologihuset for å høre på eller holde foredrag. Han er utdannet sivilingeniør data fra NTNU og har jobbet som konsulent siden 2007. Han jobber nå som sjefskonsulent i Capra Consulting.

Shervin Asgari is a senior developer with 10 years experience in different projects and industries. Shervin is a beliver in opensource and contributes on opensource projects in his spare time. As his daytime job, Shervin works as a Senior Consultant at Webstep Consulting.

Christina har 10 års erfaring som utvikler og prosjektleder. Hun er opptatt av å jobbe smart og fokuserer på det som får oss fremover, som team og prosjekt. Hjertet banker ekstra for smidige metoder og hun er stadig på jakt etter metoder som kan gjøre henne til en bedre smidig leder.

Martin Solli er 37 år og jobber hos FINN.no, der han er framsideutvikler på FINN oppdrag. Han har jobbet med utvikling siden 1998, og har arbeidet seg oppover i stacken fra Linux-drift, via programmering i Perl, Python og PHP, deretter Ruby og Java, til JavaScript nå.

Henrik is a developer at Visma Consulting, currently working at Skattetaten. Has used Metrics in production for several years, with increasing usage. He is passionate about performance and monitoring for servers and applications.

Håkon er en utvikler som jobber for Miles Oslo A/S. Han har bred erfaring med å utvikle kommuniserende systemer, fra stormaskiner til mobiltelefoner og en hel del imellom. Han er interessert i selvbeskrivende, selvorganiserende, og selvrapporterende systemer og mener at alle systemer bør ha selvinnsikt nok til å kunne hjelpe sine klienter til å bruke seg rett og å kunne si ifra når noe er galt.

Mobilutvikler hos Knowit som liker å lage gode brukeropplevelser og appplikasjoner som folk kan bruke i det daglige. Kan også litt av hvert om web-, integrasjonsutvikling og sikkerhet.

I like programming. I do it a lot, mostly on the JVM, usually writing fancy backends for big, distributed systems. I also take part and lead communities and speak at events :-) I also display a particular affection to continuous delivery.. UI, unless quickly hacked, is not my play ;-) I believe that most problems we deal with are people problems, so I mix and match tools with technologies to achieve my goals, make people happy and achieve world peace :-) I believe in software quality, and organize GeeCON, Polish JUG, Krakow Software Craftsmanship, Cracow Hadoop User Group. In my free time, I read paper books and cycle, a lot!

Jakub Korab is a specialist consultant working in the area of open source integration and messaging using the Apache integration stack, comprised of ActiveMQ, Camel, CXF and ServiceMix. Over the years, he has worked with dozens of clients across a broad range of industries from finance through logistics to space exploration and everything in between, to develop scalable, fault-tolerant and performant system integrations. He is co-author of the “Apache Camel Developer's Cookbook”.

Joachim Van der Auwera is a software consultant with a strong focus on building quality software which is secure and maintainable. He has been using Java for more than 10 years, mostly for enterprise projects. In this period he was involved in both architecture and development of enterprise applications. He has experience using, contributing and leading open source projects. He has a focus on making applications enterprise-level, on usability and maintainability (especially at API level) and security. Some of his mantras include consistency (APIs and user interfaces), repeatability (builds and tests) and user-friendliness (especially exception!). Speaker's qualifications Devoxx 2014 quickie: Simple run-time profiling Devoxx 2013 quickie on jTransfo MapWindow Conference 2012: Introducing the Geomajas Open Source framework for building spatial web applications MapWindow Conference 2012: Ktunaxa RMS, open source GIS for a first nation BeJUG 2012: Geomajas introduction Jax London 2011 : Mapping, GIS and geolocating data in Java Jazoon 2011 : Mapping, GIS and geolocating data in Java Devoxx 2010 : Introduction to the Geomajas web mapping framework Devoxx 2010 : iText in action section on use of iText in Geomajas Devoxx 2010 birds-of-a-feather : "Geomajas web mapping users meeting" Foss4G 2010 : Evolution of GIS data

Stein Inge is Practice Lead for BEKKs commitment to Continuous Delivery and DevOps. He is a true Agile evangelist with 15 years of experience in both contributing to, and helping others to become better at producing excellent software. He is also an experienced speaker at conferences and the founder of DevOps Norway Meetup.
Erlend is a senior security consultant at F-Secure. He has worked as a developer and secure coder for over 10 years, but is now focusing even more on security doing penetration testing, code auditing and security training for clients. He is an experienced speaker and the OWASP Norway chapter lead.

Zefops, Gymops, Skateops. C / Clojure / Haskell / Java hacker, meetup organiser, @ClojureWerkz core team. Data analysis & visualization nerd.

Anne Landro har jobbet med systemutvikling i mange år. Den siste tiden har hun hatt mest fokus på det funksjonelle aspektet av å lage gode systemer. Hun liker godt å prøve forskjellige roller, og trives best når hun kan få en god forståelse av helheten og behovene bak et system.

Eivind liker å programmere datamaskiner. Han har over 15 års erfaring med utvikling av Java-baserte applikasjoner. Eivind jobber i Kodemaker.

Erik jobber som konsulent hos Iterate AS. Han jobber stort sett med backend, men havner stort sett der koden er dårlig nok. Gitt nok tid blander han seg gjerne inn i både test, drift og prosjektledelse.

I've been programming for money for 15 years now in all sorts of environments. Done both sustaining work and greenfield development. I like making things, and making things better. I also enjoy making people think, question their beliefs, not just follow authorities, but figure things out for themselves. Have 2 talks in the top 5 most viewed JavaZone talks of all time. https://vimeo.com/28885655 and https://vimeo.com/49484333

When not working at Bouvet developing software to save energy spending by trains in Europe, Ragnar enjoys taking photos of galaxies far, far away, photos of places near and far, and building stuff. Like his own HiFi, control systems and gadgets.

CEO & Co-founder @ Greenbird Integration Technology. Mer enn 20 års erfaring fra bransjen som enterprise arkitekt, integrasjonsarkitekt og javautvikler.

Fredrik works as a software developer and consultant at Iterate. His main interest currently is functional programming and in particluar how to apply this in his daily job as a Java developer. The last year he's been happily rewriting code to a more functional style in Java 8. He's held training courses in Scala and dabbled in Clojure, and likes to speak at conferences.

Med over 15 års erfaring innen web- og applikasjonsutvikling har Mikkel Steine jobbet med alle deler av teknologi-stacken. GUI, grafikk, design og brukeropplevelse står hjertet nærmest. Jobber til daglig som seniorkonsulent for Mesan, med Java-prosjekter, web-utvikling og mobil.

Fabian Lange is Lead Agent Developer and Performance Geek at Instana, where he is building a IT Operations solution, which uses machine learning and knowledge bases to visualize even complex environments in a simple manner. His passion is to build fast software and help others to do the same, by speaking at conferences, or authoring on the web or paper. He loves using open source software and claims to have reported at least one issue on every library he had used.

Markus is a Developer Advocate at Red Hat and focuses on JBoss Middleware. He is working with Java EE servers from different vendors since more than 14 years and talks about his favorite topics around Java EE on conferences all over the world. He has been a principle consultant and worked with different customers on all kinds of Java EE related applications and solutions. Beside that he has always been a prolific blogger, writer and tech editor for different Java EE related books. He is an active member of the German DOAG e.V. and it's representative on the iJUG e.V. As a Java Champion and former ACE Director he is well known in the community.

Sven Efftinge is the project lead of Xtext, a framework for developing programming languages and domain-specific languages. Sven works as development manager for itemis.

Oleg Šelajev is an engineer, author, speaker, lecturer and advocate at ZeroTurnaround. He spends his time testing, coding, writing, giving conference talks, crafting blogposts and reports... in fact, if it contains words around development or productivity, Oleg is often lurking nearby. He enjoys spending time tinkering with Clojure, Git and MacVim and is pursuing a PhD on Dynamic System updates and code evolution. Oleg is a part-time lecturer at the University of Tartu and enjoys speaking and participating in Java/JVM development conferences such as JavaOne, GeeCON, DevoxxFR, GeekOut UK and others. In his free time, Oleg plays chess at a semi-grandmaster level, loves puzzles and solving all kinds of problems.

Stephen Chin is the Lead Java Community Manager at Oracle, author of Raspberry Pi with Java, co-author of Pro JavaFX Platform, and JavaOne Content Co-Chair. He has keynoted numerous Java conferences around the world including JavaOne, where he is a 4 time Rock Star Award recipient. Stephen is an avid motorcyclist who has done several Pan-European evangelism tours, interviewing hackers in their natural habitat and posting the videos on http://nighthacking.com/. When he is not traveling, he enjoys teaching kids how to do embedded and robot programming together with his 11 year old daughter.

Interaksjonsdesigner i Sopra Steria. Har vært de to siste årene utleid til Husbanken i forbindelse med eSøknad bostøtte og startlån, hvor førstnevnte vant Difis kåring av årets digitale tjeneste i 2014 og Dogas Merket for god design i 2015. Brenner for gode brukeropplevelser på tvers av befolkningen og har stor tro på et tett samarbeid mellom utviklere og designere må til for å få til dette.

A blogger (http://http://psy-lob-saw.blogspot.com/) and a coder with a pedantic passion for performance. My work has spanned army intelligence systems, dot.com era startups, financial institutions and innovative product companies. The Lead Performance Eng. for Azul Systems by day, main contributor to kickass lock free data structures library JCTools by night.

Sigmund har jobbet som konsulent i Knowit siden januar 2007, og før det et par år i forskningssektoren. Siden august 2011 til august 2015 var han vært teamleder og hovedarkitekt på Knowits største rene Scala-prosjekt. I tillegg til å være en lidenskapelig Scala-fanboy, setter Sigmund også pris på andre teknologier som gjør systemutvikling enkelt og forutsigbart. Han avskyr dynamisk typing og unødvendig kompliserte løsninger. Ved siden av konsulentrollen jobber Sigmund som pardansinstruktør på kveldstid, og bruker alt for mye tid på spill og øl.

Jeg er en fullstack utvikler fra Miles som er veldig glad i god brukeropplevelse, men som også bryr meg om temaer som smidig, testing, håndverk og sikkerhet.

Interaksjonsdesigner i Sopra Steria med interesse for front end og alle former for design. Lidenskapelig opptatt av å forstå brukerne mine og redde verden fra dårlige brukeropplever. Jobber for tiden med å designe elektronisk søknad for Startlån hos Husbanken. Utdannet ved NTNU og jobbet som utvikler før designinteressen tok overhånd.

Niklas Therning is the founder of the RoboVM open-source project and head geek at RoboVM AB. He has made it his mission to bring Java and other JVM languages to iOS and do it properly. Niklas has been presenting on RoboVM at conferences such as JavaOne, Devoxx and JFokus.
Henric Müller has 15 years of experience developing everything from mobile apps to enterprise systems. Henric is the co-founder and CEO of RoboVM AB, the company which oversees the development of the RoboVM open-source project.

Passionate Java, BASH, Python, UNIX and GNU/Linux craftsman with a keen interest in web standards - and Emacs. Writes code in Escenic R&D.

Simen Sommerfeldt er rådgiver og CTO ved Bouvet Øst. I sitt daglige virke jobber han som rågiver innen virksomhetsarkitektur og strategisk IT for flere store bedrifter og organisasjoner. Simen har tidligere erfaring fra eksportbedrifter innen telekom-bransjen. Han har i de senere år skrevet mye om tingenes internet og holdt mange foredrag om temaet.
Jon Andreas Pretorius er leder for IKT applikasjonstjenester i Hafslund ASA. Han har jobbet i Hafslund i 12 år, hvor han de siste fem årene, etter 6 år på forretningssiden, har jobbet med konsern-IKT. IKT applikasjonstjenester i konsernet forvalter og utvikler det konsernfelles applikasjonslandskapet.

Geir er seniorkonsulent i Conduct, og vært endringskatalysator i roller som systemutvikler, løsningarkitekt og teamleder i en rekke forskjellige oppdrag både i offentlig og privat sektor. Domenene har spenn fra telekom til detaljhandel og fra sikkerhetsløsninger og pensjonshåndtering.

Rustam Mehmandarov har en mastergrad fra Institutt for Informatikk, UiO. Han har over 9 års erfaring som utvikler, teknisk prosjektleder, leveranseansvarlig og arkitekt i både store og små prosjekter. Han har interesse for smidig utvikling, webutvikling, arkitektur og geografiske informasjonssystemer. Rustam er en guru på både Linux og Windows. På fritiden er han veldig glad i å trene, når han ikke sitter og koder i Python eller Java. Rustam snakker også ofte på forskjellige konferanser som JavaZone, NDC, Boosterconf, Trondheim Developer Conference og diverse faglige events på universiteter over hele Norge.

Vidar er en teknisk arkitekt og senior programmerer med 17 års erfaring i bransjen, og var før det en ivrig hobbyprogrammerer allerede fra en alder av 10 år. Ren og effektiv kode samt tilsvarende arkitektur har hele tiden vært en pasjon. Trives godt med nesen dypt ned i kode.

Tobias har jobbet som konsulent i en årrekke, men jobber nå i Skattetaten fordi de gjør mye morro. Han har han stort sett har jobbet med utvikling av backend java-løsninger, men har også interesse for mobilutvikling og har vært med på å implementere apper du bruker daglig. Tobias har holdt foredrag på konferanser før, så han håper og tror at dette foredraget skal gå greit

Erlend Hamberg started a on computer engineering degree to learn about systems programming and hardware, but veered slightly off course and ended up with a degree in computer science with a specialization in artificial intelligence. He loves functional programming – especially in languages with strong type systems, but still has a weak spot in his heart for C. Erlend is currently at Soundrop where he's trying to help the music industry. When not tinkering with programming or programming language theory he can be found kayaking in the Oslo fjord.

Software Engineer at appear.in, basically getting paid to have fun. Currently working a mix between talking a lot, and making appear.in on Android great.

Peyman er seniorkonsulent og arkitekt i Inmeta Consulting. Han har mastergrad utdanning i systemutvikling fra UiO. Hans hoveinteresser er systemutvikling, arkitektur innovasjon og fotball.

Andres is a Java/Groovy developer and Java Champion, with more than 15 years of experience in software design and development. He has been involved in web and desktop application developments since the early days of Java. His current interests include Groovy, Swing and JavaFX. He is a true believer of open source and has participated in popular projects like Groovy, Grails and DbUnit, as well as starting his own projects. Founding member and current project lead of the Griffon framework.

Developer and author at Sun Microsystems and Oracle, working on NetBeans IDE and the NetBeans Platform, speaker at JavaOne, Devoxx, and other international software development conferences, Java and JavaScript enthusiast, JavaOne Rock Star.

I am an enthusiastic programmer who is hopeless at accepting excellent advice from others and always has to discover things for himself first. For 20+ years I have been fascinated by computers and the stuff we can make them do. Especially distributed architectures and concurrent systems interest me the most. I am working as a consultant for Systek and am currently at NetCom, where we built awesome middleware systems which enable business to develop and bring their next generation products and services to the market.

Agile microservice guy with a passion for Open Source.

A developer and practice lead at Bekk Consulting. Particularly interested Devops and just getting things out there in production.

Enterprise search consultant at Comperio. Searching for the proper role of human intellect in the age of the information revolution.

Alex is a software engineer architect at Scytl Secure Electronic Voting. He is a passionate of Java world and he believes in the open source software model. Alex is the creator of NoSQLUnit project and team member of Arquillian, Asciidoctor and Apache TomEE projects and member of JSR374 (Java API for JSON Processing) Expert Group. Currently Alex is co-writing Arquillian in Action book for Manning and he is an international speaker presenting his talks at software conferences like Devoxx, Codemotion, JavaLand or GeeCon.

Ken Sipe is a Cloud Solution Architect at Mesosphere, focused on helping companies simplify the development and operation of large scale infrastructure and distributed systems with the Mesosphere Stack. Before joining Mesosphere, Ken lead research and development at CenturyLink cloud business unit focused on the future of cloud and data-center automation. Ken is an author and award winning international speaker on the practices of software architecture and engineering, continuous delivery practices and agile processes.

Axel Fontaine is the founder and CEO of Boxfuse (boxfuse.com), letting you go from JVM app to secure & immutable machine image in seconds. Axel is also the creator and project lead of Flyway (flywaydb.org), the open-source tool that makes database migration easy. He is a JavaOne Rockstar and a regular speaker at many large international conferences including JavaOne, Devoxx, Jfokus, JavaZone, JAX, ... You can find him online at axelfontaine.com and on Twitter as @axelfontaine

Aleksander is the CEO and co-founder of Monokkel AS, a Norwegian technology startup focused on software development and all things data! He has broad experience with Java and JavaScript development and technologies such as Elasticsearch, Lucene and Solr, with keen interests in all things big data. Aleksander has worked with search technology, machine learning and pattern recognition since 2004.

Oleg Šelajev is an engineer, author, speaker, lecturer and advocate at ZeroTurnaround. He spends his time testing, coding, writing, giving conference talks, crafting blogposts and reports... in fact, if it contains words around development or productivity, Oleg is often lurking nearby. He enjoys spending time tinkering with Clojure, Git and MacVim and is pursuing a PhD on Dynamic System updates and code evolution. Oleg is a part-time lecturer at the University of Tartu and enjoys speaking and participating in Java/JVM development conferences such as JavaOne, GeeCON, DevoxxFR, GeekOut UK and others. In his free time, Oleg plays chess at a semi-grandmaster level, loves puzzles and solving all kinds of problems.

Moved to Norway from the UK to follow his dream of being a consultant at Bouvet. Loves everything about Norway, except the price of beer. Find me at the Bouvet stand between 14:20 and 15:40 on Thursday if you want to have a chat!

Chris Richardson is a developer and architect. He is a Java Champion, a JavaOne rock star and the author of POJOs in Action, which describes how to build enterprise Java applications with frameworks such as Spring and Hibernate. Chris was also the founder of the original CloudFoundry.com, an early Java PaaS for Amazon EC2. He consults with organizations to improve how they develop and deploy applications and is working on his third startup.

Haakon has been a Java developer since 2010, and in all this time he's never written a single Enterprise Java Bean. Instead he's been lucky enough to work on Android and GUI applications, currently for FINN.no, and previously Cisco. Before working as a frontend developer, worked for several years as a Unix sysadmin, and has lately started to look into into those fiddly bits which sit in between the OS and the GUI (a.k.a. the back end).

David is a Software Evangelist working for Oracle; his primary focus is Java on the Server-Side, i.e. Java EE. Prior to Oracle, David spent a decade at Sun Microsystems focusing on Java end-to-end (from the smart card to the high end server), related technologies and the developer tools. In his various roles, David has been involved in numerous Java projects since the early days of this technology. David lives in Belgium. In his spare time, he enjoys playing video games with his daughter and tinkering with technologies such as Java, Home Automation, Electronics and Pinballs.

Coach, Designer, Analyst and Developer for over 30 years. Seb has been involved in the full development lifecycle with experience that ranges from Architecture to Support, from BASIC to Ruby. Recently he has been helping teams adopt and refine their agile practices, with a particular focus on automated testing. A regular speaker at conferences and occasional contributor to software journals. Lead author to "The Cucumber for Java Book " - Pragmatic Programmers
Henry is a failed Chemist & Biomaterials Engineer. For the last 15 years he's been working at becoming a better software engineer, and has developed award winning systems in industries ranging from energy trading and smart metering through to life insurance finance. He's the author of http://pitest.org, one of the most widely used mutation testing tools. He's based in Edinburgh where he leads the innovation team at NCR.

Jeg er utvikler hos Iterate og har masse lidenskap for webutvikling. Har i løpet av kort tid innenfor yrke skaffet meg masse erfaring innenfor webutvikling. Alltid på utkikk etter det ultimate webutvikling rammeverker.

I am developer working for SopraSteria. In recent years, I have been working for different customers with maintenance of Java legacy systems. I enjoy finding out how things work and why systems fail.

Tor Åge er en utvikler som er oppfostret, opplært og oppdratt i Skatteetaten. Direkte fra barneskolen(NTNU) har han blitt kastet ut i store prosjekter i etaten. Tor Åge har vært med på innføring av Java i Skatteetaten, og vært involvert i overgangen fra silosystemer til mikroarkitektur hvor hendelser er i sentrum. Tor Åge elsker utvikling, teknisk arkitektur og design og føler at dagen ikke er komplett uten å ha blitt skitten på hendene.

Øystein jobber som sjefskonsulent og fagsjef i Mesan. Han misliker repetitive oppgaver og er alltid på jakt etter måter å automatisere arbeidshverdagen på.
Lars Andreas jobber som konsulentsjef i Mesan, men skremmes fortsatt ut i prosjekter. Kvalitet, kodekvalitet og endringsvillig arkitektur er ting han brenner for.

Filip van Laenen is a Chief Architect at the Norwegian software company Computas AS, which supplies IT solutions to the public and the private sector in Norway. He has more than fifteen years of experience in the software industry, from being a developer in both small and large teams to being the lead developer and competency leader for security and software engineering for the whole company. He's also working on a small (open source) hobby project extracting statistical information from opinion poll results.

Kjetil is a developer at BEKK. He likes to write code.
Bendik is a developer at BEKK. He also likes to write code.

John Fjellstad has been in the software industry since 1998, working in the network management, bank/insurance and now electricity fields. Having worked in small teams of 2-3 people to larger team of 9-12, both as an internal developer and also as an external consultant, he has become interested in the field of inter-team communication and fostering knowledge sharing. He is currently working at Bouvet.

Harald has been a professional Java developer since 1998, and has a long experience developing Java based solutions. He is the author of the TwelveMonkeys ImageIO open source library. Since 2009 he's been a consultant at Bouvet. Over the years, Harald has been an active member of the Norwegian JUG; javaBin. He has given various presentations at local user meetups and participating in the planning and execution, as well as speaking at the JavaZone conference. In addition to building Lego with his kids, bicycling and listening to jazz, Harald is interested in photography and digital image processing. He has developed a strange affection for obscure file formats. Even though it's getting ever harder to find time to program for fun in his spare time, every once in a while he gets to use these skills for something useful, and write beautiful code. That makes him happy. :-)
Siegfried Göschl is currently an ASF member, Apache Turbine and JSPWiki Project Management Committee (PMC) member. Over the last 10 years he was also Apache Commons Committer & PMC working on commons-email & commons-exec, Apache XMLRPC commmitter, Apache Isis & JSPWiki mentor and Apache Maven contributor. He became involved with Open Source in 2000 contributing JUnitPP (one of the first JUnit extensions ever), got involved with Maven, confused with Jelly and wrote an Avalon container now being part of Apache Turbine (this makes him to the last Avalonier in this part of the universe). His professional interests are centered around writing server-side Java code, full-text search, performance testing, quality assurance and build management. If there is some time left besides his company, consulting work, Open Source software development and family he helps at the local Java User Group and organizing the next GDG DevFest in Vienna.

Christian is a passionate programmer working with Oslo-based consultancy Kodemaker. He's a man of eclectic background, having worked with everything from Unix systems tuning and ops to various server-side applications and JavaScript heavy frontend development. Christian is the author of "Test-Driven JavaScript Development", and he maintains several open source projects, including the JavaScript test-framework Buster.JS and the popular mocking framework Sinon.JS. Functional programming has been a growing interest the past years, and after some time with the wonderful world of Clojure and its immutable data types, he realized there was no going back.

Christopher Batey (@chbatey) is a Software Engineer by trade and is currently employed by DataStax as a Technical Evangelist for Apache Cassandra. Chris has also worked for Sky, where he helped build their online television platform, and IBM, where he helped develop a variety of messaging products. He spends a lot of his own time contributing back to the software community. Christopher has a particular interest in building effective automated tests for every scenario, including network failures, database faults and services returning junk. For that reason he built an open source test double for Apache Cassandra: Stubbed Cassandra and has recently started contributing to the HTTP test double Wiremock. He also helps with the running of the London Java Community and blogs regularly at: http://christopher-batey.blogspot.co.uk/.

Oleg is a Principal Architect with Hortonworks responsible for architecting scalable BigData solutions using various OpenSource technologies available within and outside the Hadoop ecosystem. Before Hortonworls Oleg was part of the SpringSource/VMWare where he was a core engineer working on Spring Integration framework, leading Spring Integration Scala DSL. He has 18+ years of experience in software engineering across multiple disciplines including software architecture and design, consulting, business analysis and application development. As a speaker Oleg presented seminars at dozens of conferences worldwide (i.e. Hadoop Summit, SpringOne, JavaOne, JavaZone, Scala Days, Oredev etc.).

Mads Hoel is a senior Java consultant working at Inmeta Consulting in Oslo. He has been working on several projects, customers and with different technology from back end to front end. Software craftsmanship is important to him.

Thomas is interested in all facets of software development since the times of the C64. He graduated in 1996 as master in computer science at ETH Zurich, Switzerland. Since then he worked with different technologies and programming languanges including Java and JEE. Thomas currently work as software architect at Swisslog in Buchs, Switzerland.

Henrik Wingerei jobber som seniorkonsulent i BEKK hvor han har jobbet som Java-utvikler i 3 år. Tidligere har Henrik en mastergrad fra Universitet i Oslo. Som medlem i faggruppen Java og JVM i BEKK har Henrik den siste tiden hatt et spesielt fokus på Java og JVM-plattformen. I tillegg har Henrik en generell interesse for alternativ språk og paradigmer. Henrik har tidligere holdt foredrag på både JavaZone og meetups.

Michael begynte å programmere på en Casio FX-602P og har vært fascinert av datateknologi siden. Datateknologilivet begynte for ham for fullt i 1999, med hovedfokus på millenium-feilen. Han programmerer ikke bare for å løse tekniske oppgaver men enkelte ganger bare for estetikkens skyld. Han elsker å lære nye og gamle ting, å anvende teori i praksis, å kjenne teorien kun for teoriens skyld. Han sysselsetter den andre halvdelen av hjernen med musikk og litteratur. Java har vært en del av hans yrkesliv siden 2006. Michael jobber som utvikler, teknisk arkitekt og teknisk prosjektleder i Computas. Han har jobbet på flere store Java prosjekt, og er leder for Java fagnettverket i Computas. Han liker ren, tydelig, lesbar og vedlikeholdbar kode med akurat nok dokumentasjon.

Rafael is based in Oslo, Norway and works as a software engineer at Bouvet. He is a proponent of static typing and a JVM enthusiast with particular interests in code instrumentation, concurrency and functional programming. Rafael blogs about software development, regularly presents at conferences and was pronounced a Java One Rock Star. When coding outside of his work place, he contributes to a wide range of open source projects and often works on Byte Buddy, a library for simple runtime code generation for the Java virtual machine.

Bert Ertman is a Fellow at Luminis in the Netherlands. Besides his day job he served as the Java User Group leader for NLJUG, the Dutch Java User Group (~4000 members) for the past decade. A frequent speaker on Java and Software Architecture related topics all over the world, as well as a book author (Building Modular Cloud Applications with OSGi, O’Reilly) and member of the editorial advisory board for Dutch software development magazine: Java Magazine. In 2008, Bert was honored by being awarded the coveted title of Java Champion by an international panel of Java leaders and luminaries. Bert is a JavaOne 2012 Rock Star Speaker and a 2013 Duke's Choice Award winner.

Lisa Long is the product development manager at appear.in. Prior to appear.in she worked at Skype, where she rolled out the product process that allocated $150 million worth of resources a quarter (2000 engineers, 170 product managers.) Before Skype, she cofounded Six to Start, makers of Zombies, Run!, where she produced games for the likes of Channel 4 and the BBC. In her spare time, Lisa served as a mentor focused on product for the likes of Seedcamp (London), StartupWiseGuys (Tallinn), Microsoft Accelerator (London), and the Cartier Women's Initiative(global). She also served as a thesis mentor for the UCL Masters in Technical Entrepreneurship.

Utvikler i BEKK Consulting som lever og ånder for fete grensesnitt. Erfaren med javascript og leder BEKKs faggruppe for Webteknologier. Brukt React på flere store prosjekter i over et år og har plenty Reactkode i produksjon.
Kim is a senior consultant for BEKK in Norway, where he mostly works on large–scale JavaScript applications. He is the creator of Superhero.js, blogs about JavaScript, and contributes to open source. His current focus is on testing and architecture of large-scale frontend applications. He strongly believes that we should treat JavaScript as a real language when we use it to build large applications.

Sven is a software geek working as an Evangelist for Atlassian. He started with Java development in 1998 and has been programming for longer that he'd like to admit. Besides coding his passion is effective software development, keeping developers motivated, and helping them kick-ass. Sven has extensive speaking experience in 20+ countries on myriad topics.

Har 10 års erfaring som systemutvikler, og jobber nå som frontendarkitekt hos Dossier Solutions. Jeg blir fascinert av ny teknologi, liker å være kreativ, og utvikler blant annet apper til smartklokker på fritiden.

I'm a search and BigData technologies expert, and a frequent contributor to various open-source projects. Apache Lucene.NET committer and PMC member, Elasticsearch Consulting Partner, Microsoft MVP and the author of RavenDB in Action. I'm a frequent speaker at international conferences and provide on-site training and consultancy services around the world. Currently self-employed as a consultant and freelance developer doing lots of interesting projects world-wide.

Vegard jobber på større og mindre prosjekter hvor han lager, utreder og vurderer større arkitekturer eller gir råd til kunder om IT-strategi og teknologi. I tillegg til prosjekthverdagen jobber Vegard som scientist i BEKK hvor han synser mye om arkitektur, it-rådgiving og teknologiutvikling. Arkitektur, kvalitet, forretningsforståelse, helhetlig tenkning og samspill er alle områder som Vegard er spesielt interessert i.

Sirar Salih is a senior software engineer working at Itera Norway. He is a board member of the Norwegian .NET User Group (NNUG) and the Oslo chapter. He is also leader of the AngularJS Oslo user group. Sirar loves holding presentations and has experience from speaking at international conferences such as the Norwegian Developers Conference, JavaZone, Trondheim Developer Conference and HTML5 Developer Conference in San Francisco. He actively contributes to the open source community and writes blog posts at his .NET/JavaScript blog; http://www.sirarsalih.com/.

Sven Ruppert has been coding Java since 1996. He is a Fellow for reply in Munich. In his free time he regularly contributes to German IT periodicals, including Java Magazin, Eclipse Magazin, and Entwickler Magazin, as well as tech portals such as JAXenter.de (http://jaxenter.de/Sven-Ruppert-168244). Proud to wrote with Heinz Kabutz his first book: http://www.amazon.de/Dynamic-Proxies-Dr-Heinz-Kabutz/dp/3868021531/ref=asap_bc?ie=UTF8

Josh Long is the Spring developer advocate at [Pivotal](http://gopivotal.com). Josh is a contributor to various open-source projects, including Spring Boot. Josh has spoken at hundreds of events worldwide, and is a JavaOne rockstar. Josh has authored or co-authored 5 books on Spring and lead 3 Pearson Livelessons video series on Spring. Josh spends his time talking to developers about building next-generation applications with Spring, Cloud Foundry, and big-data technologies like Hadoop. He blogs on [spring.io](https://spring.io/team/jlong) or on [his personal blog](http://joshlong.com) and [is on Twitter (@starbuxman)](http://twitter.com/starbuxman).

Kevlin is an independent consultant, trainer and writer based in the UK. His development interests are in patterns, programming, practice and process. He has been a columnist for various magazines and web sites and is co-author of A Pattern Language for Distributed Computing and On Patterns and Pattern Languages, two volumes in the Pattern-Oriented Software Architecture series. He is also editor of the 97 Things Every Programmer Should Know.

Tiden flyr litt. Stian er fortsatt en ung krok, med bare 5 år som konsulent fra Bekk Consulting hos Posten. Stian er et råskinn på teknologi innen både DevOps og micro services, og har bred erfaring med å holde workshops om temaet på konferanser landet rundt.
Du verden som tiden flyr! Jøran har allerede rukket å bli en gammel IT-krok. Med 7 år som konsulent fra Bekk Consulting hos Posten har han fått gleden av å se konsekvensen av sine egne valg – og møte seg selv i døra mer enn én gang! Jøran er lidenskapelig opptatt av prinsippene bak både DevOps og micro services, og hva som skal til med å lykkes med det i en organisasjon.

Alf Kristian har 11 års erfaring som programmerer. Han prøver alltid å ha det gøy på jobb, og det betyr vanligvis å lage de beste løsningene for prosjektet, med de riktige språkene og verktøyene. Til daglig jobber han som konsulent hos Kodemaker.

Liv Kolås jobber som konsulent og utvikler i EVRY. Hun jobber som utvikler fordi hun liker å lage ting og kunne se resultatet av det hun gjør på slutten av dagen. I tillegg setter hun pris på en utfordring og det å tenke ut gode løsninger. På fritiden driver Liv med håndarbeid (mye strikking). I tillegg er hun interessert i sikkerhet og prøver og holde seg litt oppdatert på dette området. Som en del av å holde seg oppdatert har hun tatt enkeltemner relatert til dette på UIO (Universitetet i Oslo).

Kent er konsulent hos BEKK Consulting med 4års erfaring som frontendutvikler. Til daglig jobber han med utvikling og forvaltning av flere javascript-applikasjoner. Kent er lidenskapelig opptatt av JavaScript og arkitektur og web-tooling.

Simon is a Developer Advocate at ZeroTurnaround, Java Champion, JavaOne Rockstar speaker, Virtual JUG founder and leader, London Java Community co-leader and RebelLabs author. He is an experienced speaker, having presented at JavaOne, JavaZone, Jfokus, DevoxxUK, DevoxxFR, JavaZone, JMaghreb and many more. Simon is a track leader for DevoxxUK and JavaOne and on the program committee for DevNation. When not traveling, Simon enjoys spending quality time with his family, cooking and eating great food.

Johannes is Sopra Steria's principal software engineer. He has worked with software development for 15 years with everything from databases and server operation to JavaScript and responsive html.

Andreas kom inn i arbeidslivet for ett år siden som systemutvikler for Sopra Steria. Han har jobbet med java siden. Som ny til en verden med enhetstesting kastet han seg begeistret over mocking. Senere la han merke til den kognitive lasten slike tester medførte, og begynte søken etter bedre alternativer.

Simon Ritter manages the Java Technology Evangelist team at Oracle Corporation. Simon has been in the IT business since 1984 and holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Physics from Brunel University in the U.K. Originally working in the area of UNIX development for AT&T UNIX System Labs and then Novell, Simon moved to Sun in 1996. At this time, he started working with Java technology and has spent time working both in Java development and consultancy. Having moved to Oracle as part of the Sun acquisition he now focuses on the core Java platform, Java for client applications and embedded Java. He also continues to develop demonstrations that push the boundaries of Java for applications like gestural interfaces, embedded robot controllers and in-car systems. Follow him on Twitter, @speakjava, and his blog at blogs.oracle.com/speakjava.

Paul is a software architect for Luminis Technologies and the author of ?Building Modular Cloud Apps With OSGi? published by O'Reilly. He believes that modularity and the cloud are two of the main challenges we have to deal with to bring technology to the next level, and is working on making this possible for mainstream software development. Paul is an active contributor on open source projects such as Amdatu, Apache ACE and BndTools. He has a background as a trainer on Java related technology and is a regular speaker on conferences.
Sander crafts scalable software at Luminis Technologies. With almost a decade of experience on the JVM platform, he specializes in modular Java and JavaScript development. Additionally, data analysis and machine learning are part of his ever growing list of interests. Sander loves sharing knowledge, for example through his blog at http://branchandbound.net and by writing for the Dutch Java Magazine. He speaks regularly at international developer conferences, sharing his passion for Java, alternative JVM languages and related technologies.

Joe is a Developer Advocate at Braintree Payments, a PayPal Company. Having learnt the dark arts of FP at the University of Nottingham, Joe is passionate about functional techniques and their benefits to developers. He believes in the educational benefits of hackathons and hack culture, and supports student hackathons as part of the European team at Major League Hacking.

Mahmoud is a freelance passionate Java developer. He is an open source advocate who loves to learn and share knowledge and experience with the community.

See the talk "The Mystery Lies In Your Mind, Not In HotSpot"

Arkitekt og utvikler med mange års erfaring fra noen av de største programvareprosjektene i Norge. Brenner for lean og smidige prinsipper, og liker å utfordre både tekniske monolitter og organisatoriske siloer for å kunne levere stadig bedre og raskere.
Arkitekt og utvikler med lang erfaring fra store programvareprosjekter, inkludert det å lage monolitter. Veldig glad i koding, men bidrar gjerne i arbeidet med å få team til å fungere maksimalt med høy motivasjon. Opptatt av å forenkle gjennom å levere mindre endringer hyppigere.

June Henriksen jobber som seniorkonsulent i BEKK, og har programmert profesjonelt siden 2006. Hun leser bøker om kognitiv psykologi på senga, har en spesiell forkjærlighet for åpen kildekode, og har en mastergrad i Informatikk fra Universitetet i Tromsø og Lancaster University. June bor for øyeblikket i Oslo. Følg henne på twitter på @juneih.

Jason is a consultant in Miles AS. He has worked with architecture in commercial projects, industrial research and basic research. He is interested in how we perceive solutions and how to build up a good toolkit to support work with application, solution, and enterprise architecture.

Michael Hunger has been passionate about software development for a very long time. For the last few years he has been working with Neo Technology on the open source Neo4j graph database. Working in many roles. As Caretaker General of the Neo4j ecosystem he especially loves to work with projects, users and contributors. As a developer Michael loves to work with many aspects of programming languages, learning new things every day, participating in exciting and ambitious open source projects and contributing and writing software related books and articles.

Nicola is an all-round hacker who loves exploring and teaching bleeding edge technologies. He writes and talks about Git, development workflows, code collaboration and more recently about Docker. He currently sits on the Docker Governance Advisory Board. Prior to his current role as Developer Instigator at Atlassian he lead software teams, built crowd sourcing applications for geo-spacial data, worked on huge e-commerce deployments. Little known facts about Nicola: he gesticulates a lot while speaking (being Italian), lives in Amsterdam and rides a Ducati.

Java developer since JDK 1.1, founder of Subsonic, and partner in Scienta.

Marvin er sivilingeniør i datateknikk med fordypning i intelligente systemer, og senior systemutvikler hos Kantega AS. Han har jobbet med forvaltning og utvikling av flere store java-applikasjoner, blant annet Kantegas hjemmesnekrede CMS og applikasjoner som bygger på dette. Han liker å finne ut hvordan programmer virker, og prøver å gjøre livet som utvikler enklere.

Klara is a senior developer in the Java Mission Control team at Oracle, coding GUIs and hacking the build system. She has been working with Java/JRockit Mission Control and the JRockit JVM since 2002. If you ask Java Mission Control related questions on the Oracle forums or on StackOverflow, chances are Klara will give you an answer. You can also get hold of her on twitter to get the crochet pattern for the JDuchess mascot.

Utvikler hos Itera Norge, som jobber med alt fra JavaScript og CSS til ren Java backend. Har bakgrunn fra Datateknologi-studiet ved NTNU. Har mange brennende interesser, som diverse ballsport, dataspill, bøker og selvfølgelig programmering. Bruker for tiden mye av fritiden på en mobilapplikasjon for å søke i og lagre oppskrifter. Denne applikasjonen danner bakgrunnen for denne presentasjonen.

Neal Ford is Director, Software Architect, and Meme Wrangler at ThoughtWorks, a global IT consultancy with an exclusive focus on end-to-end software development and delivery. He is also the designer and developer of applications, magazine articles, video/DVD presentations, and author and/or editor of eight books spanning a variety of subjects and technologies, including the most recent Presentation Patterns and Functional Thinking. He focuses on designing and building of large-scale enterprise applications. He is also an internationally acclaimed speaker, speaking at over 300 developer conferences worldwide, delivering more than 2000 presentations. Check out his web site at nealford.com. He welcomes feedback and can be reached at nford@thoughtworks.com.

Christian is a passionate programmer working with Oslo-based consultancy Kodemaker. He's a man of eclectic background, having worked with everything from Unix systems tuning and ops to various server-side applications and JavaScript heavy frontend development. Christian is the author of "Test-Driven JavaScript Development", and he maintains several open source projects, including the JavaScript test-framework Buster.JS and the popular mocking framework Sinon.JS. Functional programming has been a growing interest the past years, and after some time with the wonderful world of Clojure and its immutable data types, he realized there was no going back.

Magnus Bae is a software engineer working at Itera Norway. Last year while being a student at NTNU he was a member of the Revolve NTNU Formula Student team, working with support software, including the live telemetry solutions.

Dervis er en engasjert konsulent med nesten åtte års erfaring fra Java-utvikling. Han jobber for tiden i Inmeta Consulting og har erfaring med alt fra mobile og desktop-applikasjoner til store enterprise systemer. Ved siden av jobben, er han også en aktiv blogger og Open Source utvikler. Tidligere har han blant annet utviklet kunstig intellingens (sjakk) i både Java og Scala. Dervis brenner for community og sitter i styret til javaBin. Han er i tillegg co-host for javaBin Oslo sin Meetup-gruppe som arrangerer foredrag og events for javaBins mange medlemmer.

Axel Fontaine is the founder and CEO of Boxfuse (boxfuse.com), letting you go from JVM app to secure & immutable machine image in seconds. Axel is also the creator and project lead of Flyway (flywaydb.org), the open-source tool that makes database migration easy. He is a JavaOne Rockstar and a regular speaker at many large international conferences including JavaOne, Devoxx, Jfokus, JavaZone, JAX, ... You can find him online at axelfontaine.com and on Twitter as @axelfontaine

Jan Henrik er CTO i Knowit Objectnet. Han har 20 års erfaring med teknologi på JVMen. Har de siste årene syslet mye med applikasjonsdrift, mikrotjenester og DevOps sentralt i Oslo kommune. En ivrig lettvekts-fantast som forsøker å jobbe mot smidige arkitekturer og løsninger.

